Aircraft Performance Analysis   1 
 CHAPTER  3 
Drag Force and Drag Coefficient  
 
From: Sadraey M., Aircraft Performance Analysis, VDM Verlag Dr. Müller, 2009  
 
 
 
 
 
3.1. Introduction  
Drag is the enemy of flight and its cost. In chapter 2, major forces that are influencing 
aircraft motions were b riefly introduced. One group of those forces is aerodynamic forces 
that split into two forces: Lift force or lift, and Drag force or drag. A pre -requisite to 
aircraft performance analysis is the ability to calculate the aircraft drag at various flight 
cond itions. One of the jobs of a performance engineer is to determine drag force 
produced by an aircraft at different altitudes, speeds and configurations. This is not an 
easy task, since; this force is a function of several parameters including aircraft 
confi guration and components. As it was discussed in chapter 2, the drag is a function of 
aircraft speed, wing area, air density, and its configuration. Each aircraft is designed with 
a unique configuration, thus, aircraft performance analysis must take into ac count this 
configuration. The configuration effect of aircraft drag is represented through the drag 
coefficient (C D), plus a reference area that relates to the aircraft.  
 
An aircraft is a complicated three -dimensional vehicle, but for simplicity in 
calcul ation, we assume that the drag is a function a two -dimensional area and we call it 
the reference area. This area could be any area including tail area, wing area and fuselage 
cross sectional area (i.e., fuselage cross section), fuselage surface area, and e ven aircraft 
top-view area. No matter what area is selected, the drag force must be the same. This 
unique drag comes from the fact that the drag coefficient is a function of the reference 
area. Therefore, if we select a small reference area, the drag coeff icient shall be large, but 
if we choose a large reference area, the drag coefficient shall be small. In an air vehicle 
with a small wing area (e.g., high -speed missile), the fuselage cross -sectional area 
(normal to the flow) is often considered as the refe rence area. However, in an aircraft 
with a large wing, the top -view of wing; planform area (in fact gross wing area) is often 
assumed to be the reference area.  
 
The measurement of this area is easy; and it usually includes the most important 
aerodynamic p art of the aircraft. This simplified reference area is compensated with the 
complicated drag coefficient, as we discussed in chapter 2.  Aircraft Performance Analysis   2 
  
DSCV D2
21
               (3.1)  
 
The drag coefficient (C D) is a non -dimensional parameter, but it takes into  
account every aerodynamic configuration aspect of the aircraft including large 
components as wing, tail, fuselage engine, and landing gear; and small elements such as 
rivets and antenna . This coefficient has two main parts (as will be explained in the nex t 
section). The first part is referred to as lift -related drag coefficient or induced drag 
coefficient (C Di) and the second part is called zero -lift drag coefficient (C Do). The 
calculation of the first one is not very hard, but it takes a long time and ene rgy to 
determine the second part. In large transport aircraft, this task is done by a group of 
engineers up to twenty engineers for a time period of up to six months. For this reason, a 
large portion of this chapter is devoted to the calculation of C Do. This calculation is not 
only time consuming, but also is very sensitive, since it influences every aspect of aircraft 
performance.  
One of the occasions  in which the drag is considered a beneficial factor and is 
effectively used is in parachute.  A parachute  is a device employed to considerably slow 
the motion of an object/vehicle through an atmosphere  (e.g., Earth or Mars) by increasing 
drag. Parachutes are used with a variety of loads, including people, food, equipment, and 
space capsules. Drogue chutes are  used to sometimes provide horizontal deceleration of a 
vehicle (e.g., space shuttle after a touchdown). The parachute  is utilized by paratroopers  
to extremely  reduce the terminal speed for a safe landing.  
One of the primary functions of aerodynamicists an d aircraft designers is to 
reduce this coefficient. Aircraft designers are very sensitive about this coefficient, 
because any change in the external configuration of aircraft will change this coefficient 
and finally aircraft direct operating cost. As a per formance engineer, you must be able to 
estimate the C Do of any aircraft just by looking at its three -view with an accuracy of about 
30%. As you spend more time for calculation, this estimation will be more accurate, but 
will never be exact, unless you use an aircraft model in a wind tunnel or flight test 
measurements with real aircraft model. The method presented in this chapter is about 
90% accurate for subsonic aircraft and 85% for supersonic aircraft.    
3.2. Drag Classification  
Drag force is the summati on of all forces that resist against aircraft motion. The 
calcul ation of the drag of a complete air craft is a difficult and challenging task, even for 
the simplest configurations. We will consider the separate sources of drag that contribute 
to the total d rag of an aircraft. The variation of drag force as a function of airspeed looks 
like a graph of parabola. This indicates that the drag initially reduces with airspeed, and 
then increases as the airspeed increases. It demonstrates  that there are some parame ters 
that will decrease drag as the velocity increases ; and there are some other parameters that 
will increase drag as the velocity increases. This observation shows us a nice direction for 
drag classification. Although the drag and the drag coefficient ca n be expressed in a 
number of ways, for reasons of simplicity and clarity, the parabolic drag polar will be Aircraft Performance Analysis   3 
 used in all main analyses. Different references and textbooks use different terminology, 
so it may confuse students and engineers. In this section, a list of definitions of various 
types of drag is presented, and then a classification of all of these drag forces is 
described.  
 
Induced Drag:  The drag that results from the generation of a trailing vortex system 
downstream of a lifting surface with a  finite aspect ratio.  In another word, th is type of  
drag is induced by the lift force.  
Parasite Drag:  The total drag of an airplane minus the induced drag. Thus, it is the drag 
not directly associated with the production of lift. The parasite drag is composed of drag 
of various aerodynamic  components ; the definitions of which follow.  
Skin Friction Drag:  The drag on a body resulting from viscous shearing stresses (i.e., 
friction) over its contact  surface  (i.e., skin) . The drag of a very streamlined shape such as  
a thin, flat plate is frequently expressed in terms of a skin friction drag. This drag is a 
function of Reynolds number. There are mainly two cases where the flow in the boundary 
layer is entirely laminar or entirely turbulent over the plate. The Reynolds  number is 
based on the total length of the object  in the direction of the velocity. In a usual 
application, the boundary layer is normally laminar near the leading edge of the object  
undergoing transition to a turbulent layer at some distance back along t he surface.  
 
A laminar boundary layer begins to develop at the leading edge and its thickness 
grows in downstream. At some distance from the leading edge the laminar boundary 
becomes unstable and is unable to suppress disturbances imposed on it by surface  
roughness or fluctuations in the free stream. In a distance the boundary layer usually 
undergoes a transition to a turbulent boundary layer. The layer suddenly increases in 
thickness and is characterized by a mean velocity profile on which a random fluctu ating 
velocity component is superimposed. The distance, from the leading edge of the object  to 
the transition point can be calculated from the transition Reynolds number.  Skin friction 
factor is independent of surface roughne ss in laminar flow, but is a st rong function of 
surface roughness in turbulent flow due to boundary layer.  
 
Form Drag (sometimes called  Pressure Drag ): The drag on a body resulting from the 
integrated effect of the static pressure acting normal to its surface resolved in the drag 
direct ion. Unlike the skin friction drag that results from viscous shearing forces tangential 
to a body’s surface, form drag results from the distribution of pressure normal to the 
body’s surface. In an extreme case of a flat plate normal to the flow, the drag i s totally the 
result of an imbalance in the pressure distribution. As with skin friction drag, form drag is 
generally dependent on Reynolds number. Form drag is based on the projected frontal 
area. As a body begins to move through the air , the vorticity in  the boundary layer is shed 
from the upper and lower surfaces to form two vortices of opposite rotation. A number of 
symmetrical shapes having drag values [13] at low speed  are illustrated in Table  3.1. The 
drag coefficient values in this table  are based o n the frontal area. In this table , the flow is 
coming from left to the right.  
 
 
 Aircraft Performance Analysis   4 
 No Body  Status  Shape  CD 
1 Square rod  Sharp corner   
 2.2 
Round corner   
 1.2 
2 Circular rod  Laminar flow   1.2 
Turbulent flow  0.3 
3 Equilateral 
triangula r rod  Sharp edge face   
 1.5 
Flat face   
 2 
4 Rectangular rod  Sharp corner  L/D = 0.1  1.9 
L/D = 0.5  2.5 
L/D = 3  1.3 
Round front        
edge  L/D = 0.5  1.2 
L/D = 1  0.9 
L/D = 4  0.7 
5 Elliptical rod  Laminar flow  L/D = 2  0.6 
L/D = 8  0.25 
Turbulent flow  L/D = 2  0.2 
L/D = 8  0.1 
6 Symmetrical shell  Concave face  
  2.3 
Convex face  
  1.2 
7 Semicircular rod  Concave face  
  1.2 
Flat face 
  1.7 
a. Two dimensional bodies  (L: length along flow, D; length perpendicula r to the flow)  
No Body  Laminar/turbulent  Status  CD 
1 Cube  Re > 10,000   1.05 
2 Thin circular disk  Re > 10,000   1.1 
3 Cone ( = 30o) Re > 10,000   0.5 
4 Sphere  Laminar Re < 2×105  0.5 
Turbulent Re > 2×106 0.2 
5 Ellipsoid  Laminar Re < 2×105  0.3-0.5 
Turbulent Re > 2×106 0.1-0.2 
6 Hemisphere  Re > 10,000  Concave face  0.4 
Re > 10,000  Flat face  1.2 
7 Rectangular plate  Re > 10,000  Normal to the flow  1.1 - 1.3 
8 Vertical cylinder  Re < 2×105 L/D = 1  0.6 
L/D = ∞  1.2 
9 Horizontal cylinder  Re >  10,000  L/D = 0.5  1.1 
L/D = 8  1 
10 Parachute  Laminar flow   1.3 
b. Three dimensional bodies  (L: length, D; diameter)  Aircraft Performance Analysis   5 
 Table 3. 1. Drag coefficient values for various geometries and s hapes  
 
Interference Drag:  The increment in dra g resulting from bringing two bodies in 
proximity to each other. For example, the total drag of a wing -fuselage combination will 
usually be greater than the sum of the wing drag and fuselage drag independent of each 
other.  
Trim Drag:  The increment in drag resulting from the (tail) aerodynamic forces required 
to trim the aircraft about its center of gravity. Trim drag usually is a  form of induced and 
form drag on the horizontal tail.  
Profile Drag:  Usually taken to mean the total of the skin friction drag and  form drag for 
a two -dimensional airfoil section.  
Cooling Drag:  The drag resulting from the momentum lost by the air that passes through 
the power plant installation for the purpose of cooling the engine.  
Wave Drag:  This drag ; limited to supersonic flow; is a form of induced  drag resulting 
from non -canceling static pressure components to either side of a shock wave acting on 
the surface of the body from which the wave is emanating.  
 
Figure 3. 1. Drag classification  
 
The material to follow will consider these various types of drag in detail and will present 
methods of reasonably estimating their magnitudes. Figure 3. 1 illustrates the drag 
classification  into two major groups . 
 
For a conventional aircraft, the drag is divide d into t wo main parts; lift related 
drag, and non -lift related drag. The first part is called induced drag (D i), because this drag 
is induced by lift  (pressure) . The second part is referred to as zero -lift drag (D o), since it 
does not have any influence from lift , and is mainly originates from shear stress .  
 Drag  
Zero -lift Drag  Induced Drag  
Skin friction 
Drag  Form 
Drag  Miscellaneous 
Drag  Wave 
Drag  Vortex 
Drag  Wave Drag  
Landing 
gear Fuselage  Tail Wing  Strut  Nacelle  
Interference 
Drag  Trim  
Drag  Cooling  
Drag  CL 
dependent  Volume 
dependent  Compressibility 
Drag  Aircraft Performance Analysis   6 
  
i oD DD
                    (3.2)  
 
a. Induced drag:  The induced drag is the drag directly associated with the 
production of lift. This results from the dependency of the induced drag on the 
angle o f attack. As the angle of attack of the aircraft (i.e. , lift coefficient) varies, 
this type of drag is changed. The induced drag in itself consists of two parts. The 
first part originates from vortices around wing, tail, fuselage, and other 
components. The  second part is because of air compressibility effect. In low 
subsonic flight, it is negligible, but is high subsonic and transonic flight, must be 
taken into account. In supersonic flight, wave drag (D w) is added to the induced 
drag. The reason is to acco unt for the contribution  of shock wave. The wing is the 
major aircraft component contributor  for the lift production. Thus, about 80% of 
the induced drag comes from wing; about 10% comes from tail; and the rest 
originate from other components.  The induced drag is a function of airspeed, air 
density, reference area, and the lift coefficient:  
iD i SCV D2
21
               (3.3)  
 
In this equation, the coefficient C Di is called induced drag coefficient. The method 
to calculate this coefficient will be in troduced in the next section. Figure 3. 2 
shows the behavior of induced drag as a function of airspeed . As the airspeed  
increases, the induced drag decreases; so the induced drag is inversely a function 
of airspeed.  
 
 
Figure 3. 2. Variations of D o and D i versus velocity  
 
b. Zero -lift drag:  The zero -lift drag includes all types of drag that do not depend on 
production of the lift. Every aerodynamic component of aircraft (i.e. the Aircraft Performance Analysis   7 
 components that are in direc t contact with flow) generates zero -lift drag. Typical 
components are wing, horizontal tail, vertical tail, fuselage, landing gear, antenna, 
engine nacelle, and strut. The zero -lift drag is a function of airspeed, air density, 
reference area, and the exter nal shape of the components : 
 
oD o SCV D2
21
               (3.4)  
 
In this equation, the coefficient C Do is called zero-lift drag coefficient . The 
method to calculate this coefficient will be introduced in Section 3.4.  Figure 3. 2 
shows the variation  of zero -lift drag as a function of airspeed . As the airspeed  
increases, the induced increases too; so the zero -lift drag is directly a function of 
airspeed.  
 
From the equations 3.1, 3.2, 3.3 and 3.4 ; one can conclude that drag coefficient has two 
componen ts: 
 
iD oD D C C C
               (3.5)  
 
The calculation of C Di is not a big deal and will be explained in the next section; 
but the calculation of C Do is very challenging, tedious, and difficult. Major portion of this 
chapter is devoted to calcula tion of C Do. In fact, the main idea behind this chapter is about 
calcul ation of C Do. 
  
3.3. Drag Polar  
The aircraft drag may be mathematically modeled by variety of methods. It seems natural 
to seek the similarity of variation of drag due to a flight param eter to a standard figure or 
geometry. We are looking for an accurate, but simple mathematical model , and a math 
expression for such curves as in figure 3.3.  
 
As figure 3.3 and equation 3.5 show, the drag is composed of two terms, one 
proportional to the square of airspeed (i.e., V2) and the other one inversely proportional to 
V2. The first term, called zero -lift drag represents the aerodynamic cleanness with respect 
to frictional characteristics, and shape and protuberances such as cockpit, antennae, or 
external fuel tanks. It increases with the aircraft velocity and is the main factor in 
determining the aircraft maximum speed. The second term represents induced drag (drag 
due to  the lift). Its contribution is highest at low velocities, and it decreases wit h 
increasing flight velocities. If we combine (indeed add) these two curves (D i and D o) in 
Figure 3.2 , we will have a parabolic c urve such as what shown in figure 3.3 . The 
parabolic drag model is not exact; but accurate enough for the purpose of performanc e 
calculation.  A similar behavior is observed for the variation of drag coefficient versus lift 
coefficient. Drag polar is a math model for the variation of drag coefficient as a function 
of lift coefficient.  
 
 Aircraft Performance Analysis   8 
  
Figure 3. 3. Variations of drag versus airspeed  
 
Although the drag and the drag coefficient can be expressed in a number of ways, for 
reasons of simplicity and clarity, the parabolic drag polar will has been selected in the 
analysis. This is tru e only for subsonic flight. For the existing supersonic aircraft, the 
drag cannot be adequately described by such a simplified expression. Exact calculations 
must be carried out using extended equations or tabular data. However, the inclusion of 
more preci se expressions for drag at this stage will not greatly enhance basic 
understanding of performance, and thus, will be included only in some calculated 
examples and exercises. Note that the curve begins from stall speed, since an aircraft is 
not able to main tain a sustained level flight at any speed below the  stall speed.  The same 
conclusion is true for the variation of drag coefficient (C D) versus lift coefficient (C L) as 
shown in figure 3.4.  
 
A non -dimensionalized form of figure 3.3; the variation of drag  coefficient versus 
lift coefficient ; is demonstrated in figure 3. 4. It can be proved that a second order 
parabolic curve can mathematically describe such a curve with an acceptable accuracy:  
 
2bxay
                  (3.6)  
 
where y may be r eplaced with C D and x may be replaced with C L. Therefore, drag 
coefficient versus lift coefficient is modeled with the following parabolic model:  
 
2
L D bCa C
                 (3.7)  
 
Now, we need to determine the values or expressions for “a” and  “b” in this 
equation. In a symmetrical parabolic curve, the parameter “a” is the minimum value for 
parameter “y”. hence, in a parabolic curve of C D versus C L, the parameter “a” must be the 
minimum amount of drag coefficient (C Dmin). We refer this minimum value of drag Aircraft Performance Analysis   9 
 coefficient as C Do as it means the value of C D when the lift is zero. The corresponding 
value for “b” in equation 3.7 must be found through experiment. Aerodynamicists have 
represented this parameter with the symbol of “K”, and refer to it as  induced drag 
correction factor. The induced drag correction factor is inversely proportional to the wing 
aspect ratio (AR) and wing Oswald efficiency factor (e). The mathematical relationship is 
as follows:  
 
 
Figure 3. 4. A typical variations of C D versus C L 
 
AReK1
                    (3.8)  
 
The wing aspect ratio is the ratio between the wing span (b) and the mean aerodynamic 
chord (MAC or C). The ratio  can be reformatted to be a functi on of the wing area (S) and 
wing span as follows:  
 
Sb
Cbbb
CbAR2

                   (3.9)  
 
The wing Oswald efficiency factor represents the efficiency of a wing in 
producing lift , and is a function of wing aspect ratio and the leading edge sweep an gle, 
LE. If the lift distribution is parabolic, the Oswald efficiency factor is assumed to be the 
highest (i.e. , 100% or 1). The Oswald efficiency factor is usually between 0.7 and 0.9. 
Ref. 9 introduces the following two expressions for estimation of Oswald e fficiency 
factor:  
 
  1.3 cos 045.0161.415.0 68.0 LE AR e
                        (3.10a)  
 64.0 045.0178.168.0  AR e
                     (3.10b)  CD 
CL CDo Aircraft Performance Analysis   10 
 Equation 3.10a is for swept wings with leading edge sweep angles of more than 
30 degrees and equation 3.10b is for rectangular wings  (without sweep). These two 
formulas are only valid for wing with high aspect ratio (e.g., AR more than 6).  
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. 5. Wing leading edge sweep angle  
 
The wing leading edge sweep angle (see figure 3. 5) is the angle be tween wing 
leading edge and the aircraft y -axis. Table 3. 2 shows wing Oswald efficiency factor for 
several aircraft. The value of "e" is decreased at high angle of attacks (i.e. , low speed) up 
to about 30%.  
 
 
Figure 3. 6. The gl ider Schleicher ASW22 with wing span of 25 meter and C Do of 0.016  
x 
y 
Top view  Aircraft Performance Analysis   11 
 Employing the induced drag correction factor  (K), we have a mathematical expression for 
the variation of drag coefficient versus lift coefficient.  
 
2
L D D KC C C
o
                            (3.11)  
 
This equation is sometimes referred to as aircraft “ drag polar ”. The main 
challenge in this equation is the calculation of zero -lift drag coefficient. Table 3. 2 shows 
typical values of C Do for several aircraft. The values in this table are the lowest values; 
which means at the lowest airspeed (usually low subsonic speeds). Gliders or sailplanes 
are aerodynamically the most efficient aircraft (with C Do as low as 0.01) and agricultural 
aircraft are aerodynamically the least efficient aircraft (with C Do as high as 0.08) .The lift 
coefficient is readily found from equation 2.3. Compare the glider Schleicher ASW22 
that has a C Do of 0.016 (Figure 3. 6) with the a gricultural aircraft Dromader, PZL M -18 
that has a C Do of 0.058 (figure 3. 7). 
 
 
Figure 3.7. Agricultural aircraft Dromader, PZL M -18 with C Do of 0.058  
 
Comparison between equations 3.5 and 3.11 yields the following relationship.  
 
2
L DKC C
i
                            (3.12)  
 
So, induced drag is proport ional to the square of lift coefficient. Figure 3.4 shows the 
effect of lift coefficient (induced drag) on drag coefficient.  
3.4. Calculation of C Do 
The equation 3.11 implies that the calculation of aerodynamic force of drag is dependent 
on zero -lift drag  coefficient (C Do). Since the performance analysis is based on aircraft 
drag, the accuracy of aircraft performance analysis relies heavily on the calculation 
accuracy of C Do. This section is devoted to the calculation of zero -lift drag coefficient and 
is the most important section of this chapter. The method by which the zero -lift drag 
coefficient is determined is called “ build -up” technique.  
 
 
Aircraft Performance Analysis   12 
 No Aircraft type  CDo e 
1 Twin -engine piton prop  0.022 -0.028  0.75-0.8 
2 Large turboprop  0.018 -0.024  0.8-0.85 
3 Small GA with retractable landing gear  0.02-0.03 0.75-0.8 
4 Small GA with fixed landing gear1 0.025 -0.04 0.65-0.8 
5 Agricultural aircraft with crop duster  0.07-0.08 0.65-0.7 
6 Agricultural aircraft without crop duster  0.06-0.065  0.65-0.75 
7 Subsonic jet  0.014 -0.02 0.75-0.85 
8 Supersonic jet  0.02-0.04 0.6-0.8 
9 Glider  0.012 -0.015  0.8-0.9 
10 Remote controlled model aircraft  0.025-0.045 0.75-0.85 
Table 3. 2. Typical values of "C Do" and "e" for several aircraft  
 
As figure 3. 8 illustrates, external aerodynamic components of an aircraft are all 
contributing to aircraft drag. Although only wing; and to some extents, tail; have 
aerodynamic function (i.e. , to produce lift), but every component (either large size such 
as the wing or s mall size such as a rivet) that has direct contact with air flow, is doing 
some types of aerodynamic functions (i.e. , producing drag). Thus, in order to calculate 
zero-lift drag coefficient of an aircraft, we must include every contributing item. The C Do 
of an aircraft is simply the summation of C Do of all contributing components.  
 
 
Figure 3. 8. Major components of Boeing 737 contributing to C Do 
                                                 
1 This also refers to a small GA with retractable  landing gear during take -off 
 
Wing Horizontal 
tail 
Landing Gear  
Nacelle  
Fuselage  Wing Horizontal 
tail Vertical tail  Vertical tail  Aircraft Performance Analysis   13 
 
...
HLDo So No LGo vto hto wo fo o D D D D D D D D D C C C C C C C C C                   (3.13)  
 
where C Dof, C Dow, C Doht, C Dovt, C DoLG, C DoN, C DoS, C DoHLD , are respectively representing 
fuselage, wing, horizontal tail, vertical tail, landing gear, nacelle, strut, high lift device 
(such as flap) contributions in aircraft C Do. The three dots at the end of equation 3.13 
illustrates that t here are other components that are not shown here. They include non -
significant components such as antenna, pitot tube, stall horn, wires, interference, and 
wiper.  
 
Every component has a positive contribution, and no component has negative 
component. In ma jority of conventional aircraft, wing and fuselage are each contributing 
about 30% -40% (totally 60% -80%) to aircraft C Do. All other components are contributing 
about 20% -40% to C Do of an aircraft. In some aircraft (e.g. , hang gliders), there is no 
fuselage , so it does not have any contribution in C Do; instead the human pilot plays a 
similar role to fuselage.  
 
In each subsection of this section, a technique is introduced to calculate the 
contribution of each component to C Do of an aircraft. The primary refe rence for these 
techniques and equations is Reference 1. Majority of the equations are based on flight test 
data and wind tunnel test experiments, so the build -up technique is relying mainly on 
empirical formulas.  
 
3.4.1. Fuselage  
The zero -lift drag coeff icient of a fuselage is given by the following equation:  
 
SS
ffC Cf
fowet
M LDf D
                          (3.14)  
 
where, C f is skin friction coefficient , and is a non -dimensional number. It is determined 
based on the Prandtl relationship as follows:  
 
58.2
10Re log455.0fC
                             (Turbulent flow) (3.15a)  
 
Re327.1fC
                                        (Laminar flow) (3.15b)  
 
The parameter Re is called Reynolds number  and has a non -dimensional value. It is 
defined as:  
 
VLRe
                                  (3.16)  
 Aircraft Performance Analysis   14 
 where is the air density, V is aircraft true airspeed,  is air viscosity, and L is the length 
of the component in the direction of flight. For a fuselage, L is the fuselage length. For 
lifting surfaces such as wing and tail, L is the mean  aerodynamic chord.  
 
Equation 3.15a is for a purely turbulent flow and equation 3.15b is for a purely 
laminar flow. Most aircraft are frequently experiencing a combination of laminar and 
turbulent flow over fuselage and other component. There are aerodynamic references 
(e.g., [8] and [10]) that recommend technique to evaluate the  ratio between laminar and 
turbulent flow over any aerodynamic component. The transition point from laminar to 
turbulent flow may be evaluated by these references. For simplicity, they are not 
reproduce d here. Instead, you are recommended to assume that the flow is either 
completely laminar or completely turbulent. Th e assumption of complete turbulent flow 
provides a better result; since over -estimation of drag is much better than its under -
estimation.  
 
In theory, the flow is laminar when Reynolds number is below 4,000. However, in 
practice, turbulence is not effective when Reynolds number is below 200,000; so when 
the Reynolds number is less than 200,000, you may assume laminar flow. In addition, 
when t he Reynolds number is higher than 2,000,000, you may assume turbulent flow. As 
a rule of thumb, in low subsonic flight, the flow is mostly laminar, but in high subsonic 
and transonic speed, it becomes mostly turbulent. Supersonic and hypersonic flight 
expe riences a complete turbulent flow over every component of aircraft. A typical current 
aircraft may have laminar flow over 10% -20% of the wing, fuselage and tail. A modern 
aircraft such as the Piaggio 180 can have laminar flow over as much as 50% of the win g 
and tails, and about 40% -50% of the fuselage.  
 
The second parameter in equation 3.14 (f LD) is a function of fuselage length -to-
diameter ratio. It is defined as:  
 


DL
DLfLD 0025.06013
                    (3.17)  
 
where L is the fuselage length and D is i ts maximum diameter. If the cross section of the 
fuselage is not a circle, you need to  find its equivalent diameter. The third parameter in 
equation 3.14 (f M) is a function of Mach number (M). It is defined as  
 
45.108.01 M fM
                (3.18) 
 
The last two parameters in equation 3.14 are S wetf and S, they are the wetted area of the 
fuselage and the wing reference area  respectively .  
 
Wetted area is the actual surface area of the material making up the skin of the 
airplane - it is the total surf ace area that is in actual contact with, i.e., wetted by, the air in 
which the body is immersed. Indeed, the wetted surface area is the surface on which the 
pressure and shear stress distributions are acting; hence it is a meaningful geometric Aircraft Performance Analysis   15 
 quantity whe n one is discussing aerodynamic force. However, the wetted surface area is 
not easily calculated, especially for complex body shapes.  
 
 
Figure 3. 9. Wing gross area and wing net (exposed) area  
 
A comment seems necessary regardi ng the reference area, S in equation 3.14. The 
parameter S is nothing other than just a reference area, suitably chosen for the definition 
of the force and moment coefficients.  
 
The reference area (S) is simply an area as a basis or reference that can be 
arbitrarily specified. This selection is primarily done for the convenience.  The reference 
area (S) for a conventional aircraft  is the projected area that we see when we look down 
on the wing  from top view , including the fuselage section between two parts of the wing. 
For this reason, for wings as well as entire airplanes, the wing planform area is usually 
used as S in the definitions of C L, CD, and C m. However, if we are considering the lift and 
drag of a cone, or some other slender, missile like body, the n the reference area , S is 
frequently taken as the base area of the cone or fuselage. Figure 3. 9 highlights the 
difference between wing net area and wing gross area. Thus, when we say wing planform 
area, we mean wing gross area. The reference area selectio n assumption will not incur 
any error in the calculation of wing drag and aircraft drag. The reason is that the drag 
coefficient will be automatically adjusted by this selection.  
 
Whether we take the planform area, base area, or any other areas to a given  body 
shape for S, it is still a measure of the relative size of different bodies which are 
geometrically similar.  As long as you are consistent, you may take any significant area as 
the reference area.  What is important in the calcula tion of C L, CD, and Cm is to divide the 
Wing gross area  Wing net area  Aircraft Performance Analysis   16 
 aerodynamic force/moment to a noticeable area . It is urged to an aircraft performance 
engineer that w henever you take a data for C L, C D, or C m from the technical literature, 
make certain that you know what geometric reference area was u sed for S in the 
calculation . Then use that same area when making calculations involving lift, drag and 
pitching moment . Otherwise, the results will involve significant inaccuracies . In contrast 
with S wet, it is much easier to calculate the planform area o f a wing.  
3.4.2. Wing, Horizontal Tail, and Vertical Tail  
Since wing, horizontal tail and vertical tail are three lifting surfaces, they are  treated  in a 
similar manner. The zero -lift drag coefficient of the wing (
woDC ), horizontal tail (
htoDC ), 
and vertical tail (
vtoDC ), are respectively given by the following equations:  
4.0
004.0min







w w
w w wod wet
M tc f DC
SSffC C
                           (3.19) 
4.0
004.0min







ht ht
ht ht htod wet
M tc f DC
SSffC C
                           (3.20) 
4.0
004.0min







vt vt
vt vt vtod wet
M tc f DC
SSffC C
                           (3.21 ) 
 
In these equations, C fw, C fht, Cfvt are similar to what we defined for fuselage in formula 
3.15.  The only difference is that the equivalent value of L in Reynolds number (equation 
3.22) for wing, horizontal tail, and verti cal tail are their mean aerodynamic chord s (MAC 
or 
C). In another word, the definition of Reynolds number for a lifting surface  (e.g., 
wing)  is: 
 
CVRe
                                  (3.22) 
where the mean aerodynamic  chord is calculated by  


1132
rC C
                         (3.23) 
where C r denote s root chord (See figure 3.1 0), and  is the taper ratio ; the ratio between 
tip chord (Ct) and root chord  (Cr):  
rt
CC
                         (3.24)  
The parameter f tc is a function of thickness ratio and is given by  
 
4
max max100 7.21 



ct
ctftc
                    (3.25)  Aircraft Performance Analysis   17 
 where 
max


ct is the maximum thickness -to-chord ratio of the wing, or the tail. Generally  
speaking , the maximum thickness to chord ratio for a wing is about 12% to18%, and for a 
tail is about 9% to 12%. The parameter S wet in equation 3.12 is the wing  or tail wetted 
area.   
 
The parameters Swet w, Swet ht, and Swet vt denote wetted area of the wing, 
horizontal tail, and vertical tail respectively. Unlike reference area, the wetted area is 
based on the exposed area, and not the gross area. Due to of the sp ecial curvature of the 
wing and tail airfoil sections, it may seem  time consuming  to calculate  the accurate 
wetted area of a wing or a tail. There is a simplified method to determine the wetted area 
of a lifting surface with an acceptable accuracy.  Since the wing and tail are not too thick  
(average about 15%) , it may be initially assumed that, the wetted area is about twice that 
of the net or exposed area (see figure 3. 9). To be more accurate, you may assume the 
lifting as a thing box  with average thicknes s equal to half of the airfoil thickness. 
According to this assumption, the wetted area is given as:  
 
 
Figure 3. 10. Wing Mean Aerodynamic Chord (MAC)  
Root Chord  Tip Chord  
Mean Aerodynamic Chord  Centerline Chord  Aircraft Performance Analysis   18 
 
bCctSwet






max5.012                    (3.26)  
 
For ultimate accuracy, you  need to employ a CAD software package (e.g., 
AutoCad or SolidWorks) to calculate it with a high accuracy.  
 
The parameter C dmin in equations 3.19, 3.20, and 3.21 is the minimum drag 
coefficient of the airfoil cross section of the wing or tail. It can be r eadily extracted from 
a C d-Cl curve of the airfoil. One example is illustrated in figure 3.11 for a six series 
NACA airfoil 63 1-412. Reference [3] is a rich collection of information for a variety of 
NACA 4 digits, 5 digits, and 6 -serieis airfoils. For ins tance, the NACA airfoil 63 1-412 
has a minimum drag coefficient of 0.0048 9 for the clean or flap -up configuration.  
 
Example 3.1  
Consider a cargo aircraft with the following features:  
 
m = 380,000 kg   S = 567 m2,   MAC = 9.3 m,   (t/c) max = 18%,  C dmin = 0.0052  
 
This aircraft is cruisi ng at sea level with a n airs peed of 400 knot. Assume the aircraft C Do 
is three  times the wing C Do (i.e., CDow), determine the aircraft C Do. 
 
Solution:  
 
 8
51031.1 640,334,13110 785.13.9 5144.0 400 225.1Re  CV
              (3.16)  
 
605.03405144.0 400aVM
                   (1.20)  
 
Due to the high Reynolds number, the air flow over the wing is turbulent, so  
    00205.0
640,334,131 log455.0
Re log455.0
58.2
1058.2
10  fC
                 (3.15a)  
 
 9614.0 606.0 08.01 08.0145.1 45.1   M fM
           (3.18) 
 
 591.1 18.0100 18.07.21 100 7.2144
max max  



ct
ctftc
               (3.25)  
 2
max236,1 567 18.05.012 5.012 m bCctSwet 







                (3.26) 
4.0
004.0min







w w
w w wod wet
M tc f DC
SS
ffC C
       (3.19) Aircraft Performance Analysis   19 
 
0759.0004.00052.0
57612369614.0 591.1 00205.04.0



woDC 
 
Therefore the aircraft zero -lift drag coefficient is:  
 
0228.0 0759.03 3.2 
wo o D D C C
    
 
Figure 3. 11. The variations of lift coefficient versus drag coef ficient for airfoil NACA 63 1-
412 (Ref. 3)  
Cdmin Aircraft Performance Analysis   20 
 3.4.3. High Lift Devices (HLD)  
High lift devices are parts of the wing to increases lift when employed (i.e., deflected). 
They are usually employed during take -off and landing. Two main groups of high lift 
devices are leading edge high lift devices (often called flap) and trailing edge high lift 
devices (e.g., slat). There are many types of wing trailing edge flaps such as split flap, 
plain flap, single -slotted flap, fowler flap, double -slotted flap, and triple -slotted flap. 
They are deflected down to increase the camber of the wing, in order to increase lift, so 
the maximum lift coefficient, C Lmax will be increased. The most effective method used on 
large transport aircraft is the leading edge slat. A variant on the  leading edge slat is a 
variable camber slotted Kruger flap used on the Boeing 747. The main effect of the wing 
trailing edge flap is to increase the effective angle of attack of the wing without actually 
pitching the airplane. The application of high lift  devices has a few negative side -effects 
including an increase in aircraft drag (as will be included in C Do).  
3.4.3.1. Trailing Edge High Lift Device  
The increase in C Do due to application of trailing edge high lift device (flap) is given by 
the following  empirical formula : 
B
ff
D ACCC
flapo



                      (3.27) 
where C f/C is the ratio between average flap chord to ave rage wing chord (see figure 
3.12) at the flap location and is usually about 0.2.  In case where the flap is extended, as in 
the c ase for a slotted flap, the C f represents the extended chord.  Furthermore, when a flap 
is extended, the wing chord (C) is also locally increased.  The equation 3.2 7 is based on a 
flap with a flap -span-to-wing -span ratio of 70%. In the case where the flap sp an is 
different, the results should be revised accordingly.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a. Flap; only deflected (Plain flap)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
b. Flap; extended while deflected (Slotted flap)  
Figure 3. 12. Wing section at the fla p location  f 
C Cf 
f 
C Cf Aircraft Performance Analysis   21 
 Do not confuse this C f with skin friction coefficient which shares the same 
symbol. The parameters “A” and “B” are given in the Table 3.3 based on the type of flap. 
The f is the flap deflection in degrees (usually less than 50 degrees).  
 
No  Flap type  A B 
1 Split flap  0.0014  1.5 
2 Plain flap  0.0016  1.5 
3 Single -slotted flap  0.00018  2 
4 Double -slotted flap  0.0011  1 
5 Fowler  0.00015  1.5 
 
Table 3. 3. The values of A and B for different types of flaps  
3.4.3.1. Leading Edge High Lift Device  
The increase in C Do due to application of a leading edge high lift device  (e.g., slot, and 
slat) is given by the following empirical formula:  
 
wo slo Dsl
D CCCC 


                         (3.28) 
 
where C sl/C is the ratio between average extended slat chord to average extended wing 
chord. The C Dow is the wing zero -lift drag coefficient without extending a high lift device 
(including slat).  
3.4.4. Landing Gear  
The landing gear (or undercarriage) is the structure (usually struts and wheels) that 
supports the aircraft weight and facilitates its mo tion along the surface of the runway  
when the aircraft is not airborne . Landing gear usually includes wheels and is eq uipped 
with shock absorbers for solid ground, but some aircraft are equipped with skis for snow 
or floats for water, and/or skids. To decrease drag in flight, some landing gears are 
retracted into the wings and/or fuselage with wheels or concealed behind d oors; this is 
called retractable gear. In the case of retracted landing gear, the aircraft clean CDo is not 
affected by the landing gear.  
 
When landing gear is fixed (not retrac ted) in place , it produces an extra drag for 
the aircraft. It is sometimes resp onsible for an increase in the aircraft drag as high as 
50%.  In some aircraft, a fairing is used to decrease the drag of a non -retracted gear (see 
figure 3.14b). The fairing is a partial cover that has a streamlined shape such as airfoil. 
The increase in CDo due to wheel of the landing gear is given by the following empirical 
equation:  
 




n
iD DSS
C Ci
o
1lg
lg lg
                        (3.29) 
 Aircraft Performance Analysis   22 
 where S lg is the frontal area of each wheel, and S is the wing reference area. The 
parameter C Dlg  is the drag coeffic ient of each wheel; that is 0.15, when it has fairing; and 
is 0.30 when it does not have any fairing (see figure 3.1 3). The frontal area of each wheel 
is simply the diameter (d g) times the width (w g).  
 
ggwd Slg
                            (3.30) 
 
 
 
Figure 3. 13. Landing gear and its fairing  
 
As it is observed in equation 3.2 9, every wheel that is experiencing air flow must be 
accounted for drag. For this reason, subscript  “i” is used. The parameter “n” is the 
number  of wheels in an aircraft. The drag calculation for the strut of landing gear is 
presented in the next Section. Some aircraft are equipped with skid, especially when they 
have tail gear configuration. Skid is not a lifting surface, but for the purpose of z ero-lift 
drag calculation, it may be treated as a small wing.  
3.4.5. Strut  
In this section, we deal with two types of strut: 1. Landing gear strut, and 2. wing strut. 
Landing gear is often attached to the aircraft structure via strut.  In some GA/homebuil t 
aircraft, wings are attached through a few struts to support wing structure; i.e., strut -
braced (see figure 3.1 4). Modern aircraft use advanced material for structure that are 
stronger and there are no need for any strut to support their wings; i.e. cant ilever. In some 
aircraft (such as hang gliders), the cross section of the wing strut is a symmetrical airfoil 
in order to reduce the strut drag. In both cases, the strut is producing an extra drag for 
aircraft.  
 
The increase in C Do due to application of s trut is given by the following empirical 
equation:  
 
dg 
wg  
a. Without fairing  b. With fairing  Aircraft Performance Analysis   23 
 



n
is
D DSSC C
ios so
1                        (3.31) 
 
where S s is the frontal area of each strut (its diameter times its length), and S is the wing 
reference area. The parameter C Dos is the drag coefficie nt of each strut; that is 0.1, when it 
is faired (i.e., has an airfoil section ). When strut does not have an airfoil section, its drag 
coefficient is obtained from Table  3.1. The parameter “n” is the number of struts in an 
aircraft. It is observed that usi ng an airfoil section for a strut decreases its drag by an 
order of 10. However, its manufacturing cost is increased  too. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. 14. Wing strut and landing gear strut in a Cessna 172  
3.4.6. Nacelle  
If the engine is not bur ied inside fuselage, it must be in a direct contact with air  flow. In 
order to reduce the engine drag, engine is often located inside an aerodynamic cover 
called nacelle. For the purpose of drag calculation, it can be considered that the nacelle is 
similar  to the fuselage, except its length -to-diameter ratio is lower . Thus, the nacelle zero -
lift drag coefficient (C Don) will be determined in the same way as in a fuselage. In the 
case where  the nacelle length -to-diameter ratio is below 2, assume 2. This param eter is 
used in the equation 3.17. Some aero -engine manufacturers publish the engine nacelle 
drag in the engine catalog, when the installed drag is demonstrated. In such case, use that 
manufacturer data. Determine nacelle drag, only when the engine uninsta ll thrust is 
available.  
3.4.7. External Fuel Tank  
An external fuel tank (such as a wingtip tank)  is in a direct contact with air flow and is 
generating drag.  An external fuel tank may be  modeled as a small fuselage. In the case 
where  the fuel tank length -to-diameter ratio is below 2, assume 2.  
strut Aircraft Performance Analysis   24 
 3.4.8. Cooling Drag  
An aeroengine is a source of heat where it is generated when fuel is burned in the 
combustion chamber. This heat is initially conducted to the engine external surface such 
including cylinder heads  via oil/water. In order to keep the engine efficient and maintain 
its performance, the heat should be transferred to outside airflow through a convenient 
technique; usually conduction.  Various types of heat exchangers are arranged in an 
aeroengine which r equire a flow of air through them for the purposes of cooling. T he 
source of this cooling air is usually the free air stream possibly augmented to some extent 
by a propeller slipstream (in a prop -driven engine) or bleed from the compressor section 
(in a turbine engine ).   
 
As the air flows through , to extract heat energy from the body , it experiences a loss in the 
total pressure  and momentum . This loss during heat transfer process may be interpreted 
as a drag force referred to as the cooling drag.  
 
Turbine engine manufacturers calculate  the net power /thrust  lost in the flow and 
subtract this from the engine uninstalled power/ thrust. In such case,  no cooling drag 
increment is added to the aircraft. Piston engine manufacturer often does not provide 
installed p ower, so the cooling drag needs to be determined in order to calculate the 
installed power. F or a piston engine, the engine power is typically reduced by as much as 
approximately 5% to account for the cooling losses.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. 15. The use of cowl flaps to control engine cooling air  
 
An engine needs to be installed to the aircraft structure (e.g., fuselage and wing) 
through a special mounting/pylon. An air cooled engine has a special mounting (See 
figure 3.15) to provide the airflow around the engine. The calculation of the cooling drag 
is highly installation -dependent. It is unfeasible to present a general technique which can 
be applied to every engine inst allation. Turbine/Piston engines manufacturers use Cowl flap opened  Cooling air  flow 
Exit air 
flow Air flow Aircraft Performance Analysis   25 
 computer software packages for the calculation of installation losses for their engines. 
Because of the complexity of the engine configuration and the internal flow through a 
typical engine installation, c urrent methods for estimating cooling losses are empirical in 
nature.  
 
For an oil -cooled turbine engine, it is sufficient to consider cooling drag by 
consulting with the engine manufacturer catalog  and using installed power/thrust . For an 
air-cooled engine , engine cooling drag coefficient (C Doen) is given [14] by the following 
empirical relationship:  
 
VSPTKCe
Deno2
81051.4
                        (3.32) 
 
where P is the engine power (in hp), T is the hot air temperature (in K)  at exit ,  is the 
relative dens ity of the air, V is the aircraft airspeed  (in m/sec), and S is the wing reference 
area (in m2). The parameter K e is a coefficient that depends on the type of engine  and its 
installation . It varies between 1 and 3.  
3.4.9. Trim Drag  
Basically, trim drag is not basically different from the types of drag already discussed. It 
arises mainly as the result of having to produce a horizontal tail load in order to balance 
the airplane around its center of gravity. Any drag increment that can be attributed to a 
finite lift on the horizontal tail contributes to the trim drag. Such increments mainly 
represent changes in the induced drag of the tail.  
 
To examine this further, we begin with the sum of the lifts developed by the wing 
and tail that must be equal with the a ircraft weight  in a trimmed cruising flight .  
WL LLw t 
                                    (3.33) 
where  
wL w w CSV L2
21
                                    (3.34) 
tLt t CSV L2
21
                                    (3.35) 
Equation 3.33 is one of the requirements of the  aircraft longitudinal trim  requirements  in 
cruising flight . Substituting tail and wing lift into equation 3.3 3, one can derive the 
horizontal tail lift coefficient (C Lt) as: 

tL L LSSC C C
w t
                         (3.36) 
 
where C L is aircraft lift coefficient, C Lw is wing lift coefficient, and S t is  horizontal tail 
area. Then , the trim drag will be:  
2
2 1

 
tL Lt
t tt
Lt D DSSC CSS
ARe SSCK C C
w t ti trimo
          (3.37) Aircraft Performance Analysis   26 
 where e t is horizontal tail span Oswald efficiency factor, and AR t is the horizontal tail 
aspect ratio. The trim drag is usually small, amounting to only 1% or 2% of the total drag 
of an airplane for the cruise condition. Reference 5, for example, lists the trim drag for 
the Learjet Model 25 as being only 1.5% of the total drag for the cruise condition.  
3.4.10. C Do of Other Parts  and Components  
So far, we introduced techniques to calculate C Do of aircraft major components. There are 
other components, parts, factors , and items that are producing drag and contribute to total 
the C Do of an aircraft. These items are introduced in this subsection.  
 
1. Interference  
When two bodie s intersect or are placed in proximity, their pressure distributions and 
boundary layers can interact with each other, resulting in a net drag of the combinatio n 
that is often higher than the sum of the separate drags. This increment in the drag is 
known as interference drag. Except for specific cases where data are available, 
interference drag is difficult to calcul ate accurately. Four  examples are: 1. placing a n 
engine nacelle in proximity to a rear pylon ( e.g., Gulfstream V ), and 2. the interference 
drag between the wing and fuselage in a mid -wing configuration . 3. horizontal tail aft of 
jet engine exhaust nozzle, and 4. wing leading edge aft of a propeller wak e. 
 
 
 
                               
a. High wing                                                          b. Mid wing  
 
 
 
 
                             
c. Low wing                                                          d. Parasol wing  
 
Figure 3. 16. Wing -fuselage interference drag  
 
Figure 3.1 6 shows a wing attached to the side of a fuselage. At the fuselage -wing 
juncture a drag increment results as the boundary layers from the two components 
interact and thicken l ocally at the junction. This type of drag penalty will become more 
severe if surfaces meet at an angle other than 90o. Reference [4]  shows that the 
interference drag of a strut attached to a  body  doubles as the angle decreases from 90o to 
approximately 60° . Avoid acute angles , if not , filleting should be applied  at the juncture 
to reduce interference drag.  
 
In the case of a high -wing configuration, interference drag results principally from 
the interaction of the fuselage boundary layer with that from the w ing’s lower surface. 
This latter layer is relatively thin at positive angles of attack. In addition , it is the 
boundary layer on the upper surface of a low wing that interferes with the fuselage 
boundary layer. Th e upper surface boundary layer is relativel y thicker than the lower Interference  Aircraft Performance Analysis   27 
 surface boundary layer. Thus, the wing -fuselage interference drag for a low -wing aircraft  
is usually greater than for a high -wing aircraft . 
 
The available data on interference drag are limited; Reference s [2] and [ 4] 
presents a lim ited amount . Based on this reference, an approximate drag increment 
caused by wing -fuselage interference is estimated to equal 4% of the wing’s zero-lift drag 
for a typical aspect ratio and wing thickness.  
 
Theoretical accurate calculation  of interference drag is impossible , unless you 
utilize a high fidelity computational fluid dynamics (CFD) software package . For 
example, a wing protruding from a fuselage just forward of the station where the fuselage 
begins to taper may trigger a flow separation over the  rear portion of the fuselage. 
Sometimes interference drag can be favorable as, for example, when one body operates in 
the wake of another.  The most accurate technique to determine interference drag is to 
employ wind tunnel or flight test.  
 
2. Antenna  
The communication antennas of many aircraft are located outside of the aircraft. They are 
in direct contact with the air, hence they produce drag. There are mainly two types of 
antennas: a. rod or wire, and b. blade or plate. Both type of antennas should be in  an open 
space (below on above the fuselage)  for a  better communicat ion. During a flight, 
airstream flows around an antenna, so it will generate drag.  
 
 
Figure 3. 17. The UHF radio antenna of a reconnaissance aircraft  U-2S Dra gon Lady  
 
 
Figure 3. 18. Antenna of Boeing Vertol CH -113 Labrador  
 
Aircraft Performance Analysis   28 
 Figure 3.1 7 shows a rod antenna of reconnaissance aircraft U -2S Dragon Lady . 
The large plate antenna of a reconnaissance aircraft U-2S is the UHF radio antenna. The 
thin whip acts as an ADF antenna. The whip was originally straight. The bend in the 
upper portion of the whip antenna was introduced to provide clearance for the senior 
span/spur dorsal pod. Most reconnaissance aircraft U-2 seem to now use the bent whi p, 
even if they are not capable of carrying the senior span/spur dorsal pod.  
 
Figure 3.1 8 illustrates lower fuselage section of a Boeing Vertol CH -113 
Labrador with various antennas and plates . Note the two blade antenna s, and two whip 
antenna s. Also seen,  is the towel -rack 'loran' antenna. The item hanging down, in the 
distance, is the sectioned flat plate that covers the ramp hinge, when the ramp is closed.  
 
 
a. pitot tube mounted under the wing of a Cessna 172  
 
b. Boeing 767  fuselage nose with three  pitot t ubes [16] 
Figure 3. 19. pitot tube  
 
Aircraft Performance Analysis   29 
 To calculate C Do of antenna, rod antenna is treated as a strut, and blade antenna is 
considered as a small wing. The very equations that are introduced for strut (Section 
3.4.5) and wing (Secti on 3.4.2) may be employed to determine the C Do of an antenna.  
 
3. Pitot Tube  
A pitot tube (combined with a static port) is a pressure measurement instrument used to 
measure airspeed and sometimes altitude of an aircraft (see figure 3.19). The basic pitot 
tube simply consists of a tube pointing directly into the air flow. As this tube contains air, 
a pressure can be measured as the moving air is brought to rest. This pressure is 
stagnation pressure of the air, also known as the total pressure, or sometimes t he pitot 
pressure.  
 
Since the pitot tube is in direct contact with the outside air, it has a contribution to 
aircraft drag (i.e., C Do). If the aircraft is in subsonic regime, the horizontal part of the pitot 
tube may be assumed as a little fuselage and its  vertical part as a strut. In a supersonic 
flight, shock wave is formed around a pitot tube, and creates additional wave drag. For 
supersonic flow, section 3.5 introduces a technique to account for pitot tube zero -lift drag 
coefficient (C Do). 
 
4. Surface R oughness  
The outer surface of an aircraft structure (skin) has  a considerable role in aircraft drag. 
For this reason, the aircraft skin is often finished and painted. The paint not only protects 
the skin from atmospheric hazards (e.g. , rusting), but also r educes its drag. As the surface 
of the skin is more polished, the aircraft drag (surface friction) will be reduced. The 
interested reader is referred to specific aerodynamic references and published journal 
papers to obtain  more information about the effec t of surface roughness on the aircraft 
drag.  
 
5. Leakage  
There are usually gaps between control surfaces (such as elevator, aileron and rudder), 
flaps, and spoilers and the lifting surfaces (such as wing and tails). The air is flowing 
through these tiny ga ps and thus producing extra drag. This is called leakage drag. 
Leakage drag is usually contributing about 1% - 2% to total drag. The reader is referred 
to specific aerodynamic references and published journal papers to gain more information 
about the influ ence of these gaps on the aircraft drag.  
 
6. Rivet and Screw  
The outside of the aircraft structure (fuselage and wing) is covered with a skin. The skin ; 
if it is from metallic materials ; is attached to the primary components of an aircraft 
structure (such as spar and frame) via parts such as rivet s or screw s. The Composite 
structures have the advantage that they do not require any rivet or screw, and are often 
attached together through techniques such as bonding.  
 
In the case of the screw, the top part of t he screw could be often hidden inside 
skin. But the heads of most types of rivets are out of skin, therefore they produce extra 
drag. Figure 3.1 9a illustrates both rivet and screw on wing of Cessna -172. Rivets and Aircraft Performance Analysis   30 
 screws are usually contributing about 2% -3% to total drag.  The author did not find any 
reference which demonstrates the calculation of rivet contribution to aircraft drag. you 
may use flight test to measure this type of drag.  
 
7. Pylon  
 
A podded turbine  engine (e.g., turbofan engine) is usually mounted to the airplane wing 
or fuselage with a pylon. Pylon is mainly a structural component , but may be designed 
such that it contribute s to aircraft lift.  Although pylon is not fundamentally a lifting 
surface, but for the purpose of zero -lift drag calcu lation, it may be treated as a small 
wing.  
 
8. Compressibility  
Compressibility effects on air craft drag have been important since the advent of 
high-speed aircraft in the 1940s. Compressibility is a property of the fluid , when a fluid is 
compressed, its d ensity will be increased . Liquids have very low values of 
compressibility whereas gases have high compressibility. In real life , every flow of every 
fluid is compressible to some greater or lesser extent. A truly constant density 
(incompressible) fl uid is a myth. However, for almost all liquids  (e.g., water) , the density 
changes are so small that the assumption of constant density can be made with reasonable 
accuracy.  
  
 
Figure 3. 20. Drag rise due to compressibility for swep t wing -body combinations (Ref. 1)  
 
As a fluid is compressible, a flow of fluid may be  compressible too. 
Incompressible flow is a flow where the density is assumed to be constant throughout. 
Compressible flow is a flow in which the density is varying . A few  important examples 
are the internal flows through rocket and gas turbine engines, high -speed subsonic, 
transonic, supersonic, and hypersonic wind tunnels, the external flow over modern 
airplanes designed to cruise faster than Mach 0.3, and the flow inside  the common 
0.9 0.95 1 1.05 1.10.0080.010.0120.0140.0160.0180.02
MCDoMach number  CDo  
  O              *              x 
 
Aircraft Performance Analysis   31 
 internal combustion reciprocating engine. For most practical problems, if the density 
changes by more than 5 percent, the flow is considered to be compressible. Figure 3.2 0 
shows the effect of compressibility on drag for three configurations.  
 
Flow velocities higher than Mach 0.3 are associated with a considerable  pressure 
changes, accompanied by correspondingly noticeable  changes in density. The aircraft 
drag at high subsonic speed (e.g., M = 0.9) is about twice as of that at low subsonic speed  
(e.g., Mach 0. 2). Consider a wing with a free stream. The lift is created by the occurrence 
of pressure higher than free stream on the lower surface of the wing and lower than free 
stream on the upper surface.  The is usually coincides  by the occurrence of  velocities 
higher than free stream on the upper surface of the wing  and lower than free stream on 
much of the lower surface.  
 
As the airspeed approaches the speed of sound (i.e., M > 0.85), due to a positive 
camber, the higher local velocities on the upp er surface of the wing may reach and even 
substantially exceed  local sonic speed , M = 1  (See Figure 3. 21). The free stream Mach 
number at which the maximum local Mach number reaches 1 i s referred to as the critical 
Mach number.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure  3.21. Local supersonic speed with a high subsonic flow 
 
The existence of sonic and supersonic local velocities on a wing is associated with 
an increase in drag. The extra drag is  due to a reduction in total pressure through oblique 
shock wave  which causes local adverse pressure gradients. In addition, when an oblique 
shock interacts with boundary layer, the boundary layer gets thicker and may even 
separates.  This is referred to as compressibility drag.  
 
A cambered airfoil has ty pically a crest and a lifting surface with such airfoil has 
a crestline. The crest  is the point on the airfoil upper surface to which the free stream is 
tangent. The crestline is the locus of airfoil crests along the wing span. The drag increase 
due to com pressibility is generally not large, until the local speed of sound occurs at or 
behind the crest of the airfoil. Empirically, it is found for all airfoils except the 
supercritical airfoil, that at 2% to 4% higher Mach number than that at which M = 1 at th e 
crest the drag rises abruptly. The Mach number at which this abrupt drag rise begins is 
called the Drag Divergence Mach number . 
 Shock wave  M > 1  M = 0.85  M = 1 (sonic line)  
M < 1  Aircraft Performance Analysis   32 
  
 
Figure 3. 22. Incremental drag coefficient due to compressibility (Ref. 1)  
 
However, t he occu rrence of substantial supersonic local velocities well ahead of 
the crest does not lead to a significant drag increase provided that the velocities decrease 
again below sonic speed forward of the crest. The incremental drag coefficient due to 
compressibili ty is designated CDc. Figure 3.22 is an empirical average of existing 
transport aircraft data.  Table 3. 4 demonstrates the incremental drag coefficient due to 
compressibility for several aircraft.  
 
No Aircraft  CDo at low 
subsonic 
speed  CDo at high 
subsoni c 
speed  Incremental drag 
coefficient due to 
compressibility ( CDc)  
1 Boeing 727  0.017  0.03 76.5%  
2 North American F-86 Sabre  0.014  0.04 207.7%  
3 Grumman F-14 Tomcat  0.021  0.029  38.1%  
4 McDonnell Douglas F-4 
Phantom  0.022  0.031  40.9%  
5 Convair F -106 D elta Dart  0.013  0.02 54% 
Table 3. 4. Drag increase due to compressibility effects for several aircraft  
 
A complete set of drag curves for a typical large transport jet is given in Figure 3.23.  
 
9. Miscellaneous items  
 
There are other items which produce drag, but due to their variations, were not listed in 
this section. These include such items as 1. footstep in small GA aircraft which allow the 
pilot or technician to climb up; 2. small plate on tails to balance the manufacturing  
unbalances, 3. catapult hook, 4. pipe and funnel for aerial fuel refueling, 5. wiper blades, 
6. angle of attack meter vane, 7. non -streamlined fuselage, 8. deflector cable, 9. chemical 
0.8 0.85 0.9 0.95 1 1.051234567x 10-3
MCDcRatio of free stream Mach number to crest critical Mach  number  CDc Aircraft Performance Analysis   33 
 sprayer in agricultural aircraft, 10. vortex generator, 11. navigation  lights, and 12. fitting. 
The calculation of drag of such minor items is out of scope of this text.  
  
 
Figure 3. 23. Drag coefficient versus Mach number  
3.4.10. Overall C Do 
Based on the build -up technique, t he overall C Do is determined readily as the sum of C Do 
of all aircraft components and factors. The calculation of C Do contribution due to factors 
as introduced in section 3.4.9 is complicated. These factors sometimes are responsible for 
an increase in C Do up to about 50%. T hus we will resort to a correction factor in our 
calculation  technique. The n, the  overall C Do of an aircraft is given by:  
 
 ...
lg
fto no o so vto hto fo wo o D D D D D D D D c D C C C C C C C CK C
                  (3.38 ) 
 
No Aircraft type  Kc 
1 Jet transport  1.1 
2 Agriculture  1.5 
3 Prop Driven Cargo  1.2 
4 Single engine piston  1.3 
5 General Aviation  1.2 
6 Fighter  1.1 
7 Glider  1.05 
8 Remote Controlled  1.2 
 
Table 3. 5. Correction factor (K c) for equation 3.3 8 
 
where K c is a correction factor and depends on several factors suc h as the type, year of 
fabrication , degree of streamline -ness of fuselage, configuration of the aircraft , and 
number of miscellaneous items . Table 3. 5 yields the K c for several types of aircraft.  
0.5 0.55 0.6 0.65 0.7 0.75 0.8 0.85 0.90.0150.020.0250.030.0350.04
MCD
  
M=0.1
M=0.2
M=0.3
M=0.4
M=0.5
M=0.6Mach number  CD Aircraft Performance Analysis   34 
  
Each component has a contribution to overall C Do of an airc raft. Their 
contributions vary from aircraft to aircraft and from configuration to configuration (e.g. , 
cruise to take -off). Table 3. 6 illustrates [2] contributions of all major components of 
Gates Learjet 25  to aircraft C Do. Note that the row 8 of this ta ble shows the contributions 
of other components as high as  20%.  
 
No Component  CDo of component  Percent from total C Do (%) 
1 Wing  0.0053  23.4 
2 Fuselage  0.0063  27.8 
3 Wing tip tank  0.0021  9.3 
4 Nacelle  0.0012  5.3 
5 Engine strut  0.0003  1.3 
6 Horizon tal tail  0.0016  7.1 
7 Vertical tail  0.0011  4.8 
8 Other components  0.0046  20.4 
9 Total C Do 0.0226  100 
 
Table 3. 6. CDo of major components of Gates Learjet 25  
 
No Aircraft  Type  Landing 
gear  mTO 
(kg) S 
(m2) Engine  CDo 
1 Cess na 172  Single 
engine GA  Fixed  1,111  16.2 Piston  0.028  
2 Cessna 182  Single 
engine GA  Fixed  1,406  16.2 Piston  0.029  
3 Cessna 185  Single 
engine GA  Fixed  1,520  16.2 Piston  0.021  
4 Cessna 310  Twin 
engine GA  Retractable  2,087   Piston  0.026  
5 Learjet 25  Business jet  Retractable  6,804  21.53  2 Turbojet  0.0226  
6 Gulfstream II  Business jet  Retractable  29,711  75.21  2 Turbofan  0.023  
7 Saab 340  Transport  Retractable  29,000  41.81  2 Turboprop  0.028  
8 McDonnell 
Douglas D -C-9-30 Airliner  Retractable  49,090  92.97  2 Turbofan  0.021  
9 Boeing 707 -320 Airliner  Retractable  151,320   4 Turbofan  0.013  
10 Boeing 767 -200 Airliner  Retractable  142,880  283.3  2 Turbofan  0.0135  
11 Airbus 340 -200 Airliner  Retractable  275,000  361.6  4 Turbofan  0.0165  
12 Boeing C -17 
Globemaster III  Transport  Retractable  265,350  353 4 Turbofan  0.0175  
Table 3. 7. CDo of several aircraft at low speed  
 
Table 3. 7 illustrates C Do of several aircraft at low speed s [15]. The retired airliner Boeing 
707 was a very aerodynamic airc raft with a C Do of 0.013. You may have noticed that 
Cessna 185 has a lower C Do compared with Cessna 172 and Cessna 182. The reason is Aircraft Performance Analysis   35 
 that Cessna 172 and Cessna 182 are equipped with fixed tricycle landing gear while 
Cessna 185 has a fixed tail dragger.  
3.5. Wave Drag  
In supersonic airspeed s, a new type of drag is produced and it is referred to as “shock 
wave drag” or simply “wave drag”. When a supersonic flow experiences an obstacle  
(e.g., wing leading edge or fuselage nose);  it is turned  into itself  and a shock wave is 
formed. A shock wave is a thin sheet of air across which abrupt changes occur in  flow 
parameters such as pressure, temperature, density, speed, and Mach number . In general, 
air flowing through a shock wave experiences a jump toward higher de nsity, higher 
pressure, higher temperature, and lower Mach number. The effective Mach number 
approaching the shock wave is the Mach number of the component of velocity normal to 
the shock wave. This component Mach number must be greater than 1.0 for a shoc k to 
exist. The wave drag; the new source of drag; is inherently related to the loss of the 
stagnation pressure and increase of entropy across the oblique and normal shock waves.  
 
In general, a shock wave is always required to bring supersonic flow back t o 
subsonic regime. In a subsonic free stream, w henever the local Mach number becomes 
greater than 1 over the surface of a wing or body, the flow must be decelerated to a 
subsonic speed before reaching the trailing edge. If the surface could be shaped such that 
the surface Mach number is reduced to 1 and then decelerated subsonically to reach the 
trailing edge at the surrounding free stream pressure, there would be no shock wave and 
no shock drag. A major goal of transonic airfoil design is to reduce the loc al supersonic 
Mach number to as close to 1 a s possible before the shock wave . One of the main 
functions of sweep angle in a swept wing is to reduce wave drag at transonic and 
supersonic airspeeds.  
 
In supersonic airspeeds, t hree main types of waves are cr eated: 1. oblique shock 
wave, 2. normal shock wave, and 3. Expansion waves. In general, an oblique shock wave 
brings a supersonic flow to another supersonic flow with a lower Mach number. A 
normal shock wave brings a supersonic flow to a subsonic flow (i.e ., Mach number less 
than 1). However, an expansion wave brings a supersonic flow to another supersonic 
flow with a higher Mach number. In supersonic airspeeds, a  shock wave may happen at 
any place in the aircraft , including wing leading edge, horizontal ta il leading edge, 
vertical tail leading edge, and engine inlet. All these aircraft components locations will 
create an extra drag when a shock wave is formed. Thus , in supersonic speed, the drag 
coefficient is expressed by:  
 
w i o D D D D C C C C 
                (3.39) 
 
where C Dw is referred to as "wave drag coefficient". The precise calculation of C Dw is 
time consuming, but to give the reader the guidance , we present two techniques, one for a 
lifting surface leading edge ; and one for the whole aircraft . For  a complicated geometry 
aircraft  configuration , the drag may be computed with aerodynamics techniques such as 
vortex panel method and “Computational Fluid Dynamics ” techniques. Figure 3.24 
illustrates Lockheed Martin F-35 Lightning Joint Strike Fighter, a new generation of Aircraft Performance Analysis   36 
 fighters.  It is claimed that F -35 will be the last manned fighters, and in the near future, the 
fighters will be unmanned.  
 
 
Figure 3. 24. Lockheed Martin F-35 Lightning Joint Strike Fighter, a new generation 
of fighters  
3.5.1. Wave Drag  for Wing and Tail  
In this section, the wave drag of a wing is presented. In an aircraft with a supersonic 
maximum speed, the locations where have the first impact with airflow (such as wing 
leading edge, horizontal tail leading edge, vertical tail leading edge, fuselage nose, and 
engine inlet edge) are usually made sharp. One main reason for this initiative is to reduce 
the number of shack waves created over the aircraft components during a supersonic 
flight. Two airfoil cross se ctions which are frequently employed for wing, horizontal tail, 
and vertical tail are double wedge and biconvex (See figure 3.2 5).  
 
 
 
 
a. double wedge                                   b. biconvex  
Figure 3. 25. Supersonic air foil sections  
 
In this section, a wave drag calculation technique is introduced which is applicable to any 
component where has a corner angle (e.g., double wedge and biconvex) and experiences 
a shock wave. Then wave drag coefficient ( CDw) for such componen t is calculated 
separately and then all C Dw are summed  together.  
 
Consider a the front top half of a wedge with a sharp corner that experiences an oblique 
shock in a supersonic flow ( as illustrated in Figure 3.26 ). The wedge has a wedge angle 
of , and the free stream pressure, and Mach number are P 1 and M 1 respectively. When 
Aircraft Performance Analysis   37 
 the supersonic flow hits the corner, an oblique shock with angle of  to the free stream is 
generated.  
  
For each component with such configuration , the wave drag coefficient  is given by:  
PSMD
SVDCw w
Dw2 2
21
21 
 
              (3.40) 
 
where subscript infinity (
 ) means that the parameter are considered in the infinity 
distance from the surface. Please note that, t his does not really mean infinity, but it 
simply means at a distance out of the effect of shock and the surface (i.e. , free stream). 
The parameter S is the surface of a body at which the pressure is acting  (i.e., planform 
area).  
 
Dw is the wave drag and is equal to the axial component of the pressure  force. In 
supersonic speeds, the induced drag may be ignored, since it has negligible contribution, 
compared to the wave drag. In supersonic speeds, the lift coefficient has a very low  value . 
Since, the wedge has an angle, ; the drag force due to flow pr essure actin on a wedge 
surface with an area of “A” is given by:  
 
sin2AP Dw
                   (3.41) 
 
where P 2 represents the pressure behind a n oblique  shock wave, and  is the corner angle 
(see figure 3.2 6). Please note that; in this particu lar case, the pressure at the lower surface 
is not change d. The relationship between upstream and downstream flow parameters may 
be derived using energy law, mass conservation law, and momentum equation. The 
relationship between upstream pressure (P 1) and d ownstream pressure (P 2) is given [7] 
by:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. 26. Geometry for drag wave  over a wedge  
 

 11212
1 1 2 nM P P
                 (3.42)  
where  is the is the ratio of specific heats at constant pressure and constant volume (  = 
cp/cv). For air at standard condition,  is 1.4. The variable Mn1 is the normal component of 
the upstream Mach number, and is given by:  oblique  
shock  
M2 
P2 
P1 
M1 DW Aircraft Performance Analysis   38 
    
sin1 1M Mn
                    (3.43)  
 
The parameter  oblique shock angle  is a nonlinear function of up stream Mach 
number and  wedge c orner angle ( ): 
 




2 2cos1 sincot2 tan2
12 2
1
MM                (3.44)  
Equation 3.44 is called -M relation. For any given , there are two value s of  
predicted for any given Mach number. Take the lowe r value which is the representation 
of the weal  shock wave  which is favored by the nature . 
 
The pressure may also be non -dimensionalized as follows:  
 
p p CPM CV PP    2 2
221
21 
        (3.45)  
 
where C p is the pressure coefficient.  
 
Now, consider another more general case, where a supersonic airfoil has an angle of 
attack, or when the second half of a wedge is considered. In such a case, where a 
supersonic flow is turned away from itself, an expansion wave is formed (See figure 
3.27). Expansion waves are the antithesis of shock waves. In an expansion corner, t he 
flow Mach number is increased, but the static pressure, air density , and temperature 
decrease through an expansion wave.  The expansion wave is also referred to as the 
Prandtl -Meyer  expansion wave.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. 27. Oblique shock and Prandtl -Meyer expansion  waves  
 
For a wing with a  wedge airfoil section shown in figure 3.2 7, the drag force is  the 
horizontal components of the pressure force, so:  
  sin sin3 2 AP APD  
          (3.46) 
where A is the surface area , and is equal to : Oblique  shock wave  
M3, P3 M2, P2 Mach lines  
M1, P1 
C Aircraft Performance Analysis   39 
 
cos2CbA            (3.47) 
 
 
where b is the wing span (not shown in the figure). Plugging the equation 3.46 into 
equation 3.47 , the following result is obtained:   
  tan21sincos2
3 2 3 2 bCPPCbPP D  
         (3.48) 
If the wing has a different geometry, use this basic technique to determine the wing wave 
drag. The pressure behind the expansion wave is given [7] by the fol lowing equation:  
1
2
32
2
2 3
211211







MM
P P
            (3.49) 
where the flow Mach number behind expansion wave (M3) and the flow Mach number 
behind expansion wave (M 2) are related through the turn angle,  : 
2 3 M M 
               (3.50)  
The (M) is referred to as the Prandtl -Meyer function and is given by:  
1 tan 111tan11)(2 1 2 1 



 M M M

       (3.51)  
The equation 3.51 should be employed twice in the calculation; once to calculate  M2, and 
once to dete rmine  M3. Example 3. 3 indicate s the application  of the technique . 
 
 
Example 3.2 : 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. 28.  Geometry for Example 3.2  (side -view)  
 
Consider a rectangular wing with a span; b (not shown in the figure) of 5 m and a chord ; 
C of 2 m in a Mach 2  air flow (the side -view is sketched in figure 3.2 8). The airfoil 10o 
P2 P2 
x y  M1 = 2 
P1 
C D 
P1 Aircraft Performance Analysis   40 
 section is a 10° half -angle wedge at zero angle of attack. Calculate the wave drag 
coefficient. Assume that the expansion over the corners  of the base is such that, the base 
pressure is equal to the free -stream pressure. The experiment is performed at sea level 
ISA condition.  
 
Solution:   
At sea level ISA condition, the free -stream pressure is 1 atm  (i.e., 101,325 Pa) , and air 
density is 1.22 5 kg/m3. The ratio of specific heats at constant pressure and constant 
volume for air,  is 1.4. Since the supersonic flow turns to itself, an oblique shock wave is 
produced both at top and bottom surfaces. Pressure is increased behind the shock wave 
(P2). In order to determine the pressure P 2, we need to first calculate the shock wave 
angle  (): 
 
  



 



2 2cos4.121 sin2cot2)10tan(2 2cos1 sincot2 tan22 2
2
12 2
1
MM
   (3.44)  
The solution of this nonlinear equation yields an angle of 39.3 degrees (  = 39.3 deg). 
The normal component to the shock M n1 is: 
27.13.39sin2 sin1 1    M Mn
              (3.43)  
The static pressure behind the shock wave is : 
 
 
Pa PM P Pn
364,1721 27.114.1)4.1(21325,101 1121
22 2
1 1 2

 

            (3.42)  
 
The wave drag is the net force in the x direction; P 2 is exerted perpendicular to the top 
and bottom surfaces . The force due to P 1 exerted over the base is in the direction opposite 
to the x axis . S is the planf orm area (the projected area seen by viewing the wedge from 
the top, thus S = c × b. The drag , D w, is the summation of t wo top and bottom  pressure 
force (see Figure 3. 29) components in x direction , minus the force from base pressure : 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. 29. Wave drag , the component of pressure force in x direction  
 
11 22sin 2 AP AP Dw   
                (3.41)  




cos2SP 
sincos2
SP
 S 
cosSA Aircraft Performance Analysis   41 
 where A 2 is the base area, and A 1 is the top and bottom surfaces:  
)10tan(21bC A
    
)10cos(2Cb A
                 
Thus:  
 
  N DCbPCbP D
ww
670,251 10tan25 325,1102 10tan25 364,172210tan2 10sin10cos21 2


 
By definition, the wave drag coefficient is:  
252 325,1014.15.0670,251
2122 

 SPMDCw
Dw

          (3.40)  
 
089.0
wDC
 
 
Note that this drag coefficient is based on the shock wave , and it include s the contributi on 
of the base.  
 
Example 3.3 : 
Consider a very thin flat plate wing with a c hord of 2 m and a span of 5 m. The wing is 
placed at a 5o angle of attack in a Mach 2.5 air flow  (Figure 3. 30). Determine the wave 
drag coefficient.  Assume sea level ISA condition.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. 30. Geometry for Example 3.3 (side -view)  
 
Solution:   
a. In the lower  surface, an oblique shock is formed. The pressure P3 is determined as 
follows:  P3 5o 
P2 M1 = 2.5  
P1 
x y Aircraft Performance Analysis   42 
 
  







2 2cos4.121 sin5.2cot2)5tan(2 2cos1 sincot2 tan22 2
2
12 2
1
MM   (3.44)  
The soluti on of this nonlinear equation yields an angle of 27.4 degrees ( = 27.4 deg). 
The normal component to the shock M n1 is: 
15.14.27sin2 sin1 1    M Mn
              (3.43)  
The static pressure behind the oblique shock wave is:  
 
 
Pa PM P Pn
823,1391 15.114.1)4.1(21325,101 1121
32 2
1 1 3

 

            (3.42) 
 
b. In the upper  surface, an oblique shock is formed. The pressure P 2 is determined as 
follows:  
 
For forward Mach line:  

 



 1 tan 111tan11)(2
11 2
11
1 M M M

      (3.51)  
 
 deg1.39 15.2 tan 15.214.114.1tan14.114.1)(2 1 2 1
1  



 M
    (3.51)  
 
 deg12.4451.391 2 1 2   M M M M
        (3.50)  
 
For rearward Mach line:  

 



 1 tan 111tan11)(2
21 2
21
2 M M M

      (3.51)  
 

 



 1 tan 114.114.1tan14.114.112.442
21 2
21M M
      (3.51)  
 
Solution of this nonlinear equation yields:  
 
723.22M
             (3.51)  
The static pressure behind the expansion wave is:  

Pa
MM
P P 742,71
723.2214.115.2214.11
101325
21121114.14.1
221
2
22
1
1 2 











 

     (3.49)  
 Aircraft Performance Analysis   43 
 c. Drag  
 
The wave drag force is the x -component of the pressure force:  
 
   N bCPP Dw 336,595sin25 512,71 823,139 sin2 3    
     (3.41)     
 
The wave drag coefficient is:  
 
 
25 325,1015.24.15.0336,59
212
12
1

SPMDCw
Dw
           (3.40)  
 
0134.0
wDC
 
 
3.5.2. Aircraft Wave Drag  
An aircraft has usually a complex geometry and various components. In previous section, 
mathematical technique was introduced to calculate the wave drag where the object has a 
very simple (e.g., flat plate, wedge) configuration. Every aircraft component contributes 
to wave drag. In this section, a technique is presented to determine the wave drag of a 
complete aircraft.  
 
In this approach , we consider an aircraft as a whole and we will not divide it into several 
components. This is an approximate and empirical technique [8]. The aircraft w ave drag 
coefficient consists of two parts ; volume -dependent wave drag (C Dwv), and lift -dependent 
wave drag (C Dwl). The volume -dependent wave drag is a function of aircraft volume and 
much greater than lift -dependent wave drag. The reason is that , at supersonic speed s, the 
lift coefficient (C L) is very minimal .  
vw lw w D D D C C C 
            (3.52) 
The lift-dependent wave drag is given by : 

22 2
21
LM SCKCL wl
Dlw
           (3.53 ) 
where L represents the aircraft fuselage length, S is wing reference area, and K wl is a 
parameter given by  
2
2

bLSKwl
            (3.54) 
and b is the wing span.  
 Aircraft Performance Analysis   44 
  
 
Figure 3. 31. Wave drag for several aircraft (Ref. 9)  
 
The volume -dependent wave drag is given by:  
 
42128
SLVKCwv
Dwv
              (3.55) 
where V is the total aircraft volume and K wv is a factor given by : 






LbLb
Kwv

2175.01
17.1
           (3.56) 
and  is a function of Mach number as  
 
12M
               (3.57) 
 
In general, wave drag is significant,  such that it will incr ease the aircraft drag up 
to about two to three times  compared with subsonic drag . For instance, C Do of fighter 
aircraft F -4 at Mach number 1.5 (supersonic) is about 0.045, while its C Do at Mach 
number 0.6 (s ubsonic) is about 0.016. Figure  3.31 shows zero-lift drag coefficients of 
several aircraft for a range of Mach numbers from subsonic to supersonic speeds. The 
drag rise of most of the  aircraft  due to high Mach number is considerably high . Table 3. 8 
illustrates C Do of several aircraft at their cruise spe ed. 
3.6. C Do for Various Configurations  
Any individual aircraft will often  take various configurations  in flight phases . When an 
aircraft retracts its landing gear, deflects its flap, rotates its control surfaces, exposes any 
external component (such as gu n), releases its store (e.g. , missile), or opens its cargo 
door; it has changed its configuration. In general , there are three configuration  group s 
Mach number  Aircraft Performance Analysis   45 
 that an aircraft may adopt, they are: 1. clean configuration, 2. take -off configuration, and 
3. landing conf iguration.   
 
The clean configuration is the aircraft configuration employed at flight phases 
such as cruise, climb and turn. As the names impl y, the take -off configuration, and 
landing configuration are the aircraft configurations which are adopted during take-off 
and landing respectively. In an aircraft with a retractable landing gear, the landing gear 
are employed during take -off and landing and retracted during cruising flight. 
Furthermore, the flaps are extended in take -off and landing operations. The f lap 
deflection angle is a function of aircraft payload weight and atmospheric conditions.  
 
No Aircraft  Engine  No. of  
Engines  Landing 
gear  CDo 
1 Pilatus PC-9 Turboprop  1 Retractable  0.022  
2 Lockheed F-104 Starfighter  Turbojet  1 Retractable  0.016  
3 Embr aer EMB 312  Tucano  Turboprop  1 Retractable  0.021  
4 Boeing 747  Turbofan  4 Retractable  0.018  
5 Lockheed  Jetstar  Turbojet  4 Retractable  0.0185  
6 Lockheed C-5 Galaxy  Turbofan  4 Retractable  0.019  
7 Boeing 727  Turbofan  3 Retractable  0.07 
8 Grumman F-14 Tomc at Turbofan  2 Retractable  0.02 
9 Learjet 25  Turbofan  2 Retractable  0.022  
10 Douglas C-54 Skymaster  Piston prop  4 Retractable  0.023  
11 Curtiss C -46 Commando  Turboprop  2 Retractable  0.025  
12 Beech V35  Bonanza  Turboprop  1 Retractable  0.025  
13 Cessna 310  Piston prop  2 Retractable  0.025  
14 McDonnell Douglas F-4 Phantom  Turbojet  2 Retractable  0.03 
15 Piper PA -28 Piston prop  1 Fixed  0.047  
16 Cessna 172  Piston prop  1 Fixed  0.028  
17 North American  F-86 Sabre  Turbojet  1 Retractable  0.014  
18 North American  XB-70 Valkyrie  Turbojet  6 Retractable  0.006  
19 F-106 Convair  Delta Dart  Turbojet  1 Retractable  0.013  
20 McDonnell Douglas (now Boeing)  
F/A-18 Hornet  Turbofan  2 Retractable  0.017  
 
Table 3. 8. CDo of several aircraft   
3.6.1. Cle an Configuration  
The clean configuration is the configuration of an aircraft when it is at a cruise flight 
condition . At this configuration, no flap is deflected, and landing gear is retracted (if it is 
retractable). Therefore the drag polar is  
 
2
C cleano clean L D D CK C C 
           (3.58) 
 
Thus , clean C Do of the aircraft (
cleanoDC ) includes every component (such as wing, tail, and 
fuselage) , and excludes  flap and landing gear (if retractable). If the landing gear is not Aircraft Performance Analysis   46 
 retractable  (e.g., as in Ce ssna 172) , the C Do includes landing gear too. The parameter C LC 
is the cruise lift coefficient.  
3.6.2. Take -Off Configuration  
The take -off configuration is the configuration of an aircraft when it is at take-off 
condition. In this configuration , the aircra ft has high angle of attack, flap is deflected for 
take-off, and landing gear is not retracted (even if it is retractable). In a take -off 
condition, the flaps are usually deflected down about 10 -30 degrees. The take -off C Do 
depends on type and the deflecti on angle of the flaps. As the flap deflection increases, the 
take-off C Do increases too. The drag polar at take -off configuration is  
2
TO TOo TO L D D CK C C 
           (3.59)  
where, t he take -off zero -lift drag coefficient is given by  
 
LGo TO oflap cleano TOo D D D D C C C C 

          (3.60) 
where 
TO oflapDC
  represent s the zero-lift drag coefficient of flap at take -off condition. In 
addition, the parameter 
LGoDC represents the zero -lift drag coefficient of the landing gear. 
Moreover, CLTO represents the lift coefficient at take -off. This coefficient does not have a 
constant value during take -off, due to the accelerated nature of the motion. The C LTO at 
the lift -off condition (where the front wheel is just detached from the ground), is given by  
 
229.0
LOLVSmgC
TO
            (3.61) 
where V LO represents the aircraft lift -off speed. The factor of 0.9 is added due to the 
contribution of the  engine thrust during take -off in vertical direction . The aircraft lift -off 
speed is often about 10% -30% higher than  the ai rcraft stall speed.  
S LO LO VK V
               (3.62)  
 
where K LO = 0.1  - 0.3. In Chapter 8, the take -off performance will be discussed in great 
details.  
3.6.3. Landing Configuration  
The landing configuration is the configuration of an aircraft w hen it is at landing 
condition. In this configuration, the aircraft has high angle of attack (even more than 
take-off condition), flap is deflected (even more than take -off condition), and landing 
gear is not retracted (even if it is retractable). In landi ng condition, the flaps are usually 
deflected down about 30 -60 degrees. The landing C Do depends of the deflection angle of 
the flaps. As this angle increases, the landing C Do increases too. The landing zero -lift drag 
coefficient (C DoL) is often greater tha n the take -off zero -lift drag coefficient (C DoTO). If 
there is another means of high lift device for the aircraft, such as slat, you need to add it 
to this equation. The drag polar at landing configuration is given by:  
2
L Lo L L D D CK C C 
             (3.63) 
 Aircraft Performance Analysis   47 
 where 
LLC  is the lift coefficient at landing and is given by : 
22
LLVSmgC
L
              (3.64) 
 
where V L is the aircraft landing speed. The landing speed (V L) and is often about 
10%-30% greater than the stall speed.  
 
SL L VK V
               (3.65)  
where K L = 0.1 - 0.3. The landing zero -lift drag coefficient is given by  
 
LGo L oflap cleano Lo D D D D C C C C 

          (3.66) 
where 
L oflapDC
  represents the zero -lift drag coefficient of the flap at landing condition . 
Both 
TO oflapDC
  and 
L oflapDC
  are functions of flap deflection. In Chapter 8, the landing 
performance will be present ed.  
 
 
 
Figure 3. 32. Drag coefficient versus lift coefficient for various Mach nu mber  
3.6.4. The Effect of Speed and Altitude on C Do 
The aircraft zero -lift drag coefficient is a function of a number of flight parameters. 
Reynolds number is one of the influential parameters on the zero -lift drag coefficient. As 
the Reynolds number incre ases, the boundary layer thickness decreases and thus C Do 
decreases as well. As equation 3.16 indicates, the Reynolds number is a function of true 
airspeed. Since the true airspeed is a function of altitude (indeed, air density), it can be 
concluded that t he Reynolds number is also a function of altitude. Another factor 
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.70.0150.020.0250.030.0350.040.0450.05
CLCD
  
M=0.3
M=0.7
M=0.8
M=0.9CL CD Aircraft Performance Analysis   48 
 affecting C Do is the compressibility which is significant at speeds higher than Mach 0.7. 
The third important factor is the wave drag as discussed in section 3.5. Considering these 
factors, it is concluded that the C Do is a function of Mach number and altitude:  
 
hMf C
oD ,
                     (3.67)  
 
At low subsonic Mach numbers, C Do is increased, due to an increase in Reynolds 
number. As compressibility factor shows up in higher subsonic speeds, the C Do increases 
with a higher rates. In transonic speeds, shock wave is formed and a jump ( sudden 
increase) in C Do will be experienced. Therefore , the C Do is directly proportional with 
speed, and as speed (Mach number) is increased, the CDo increase s. Figure 3. 32 illustrates 
typical variations of drag coefficient versus lift coefficient at various subsonic Mach 
number s. 
 
The second factor that affects the C Do is altitude. For a specific Mach number, as 
the altitude increases, the true air speed decrease s. For instance, consider an aircraft is 
flying with a speed of Mach 0.5 at sea level. The true airspeed at this altitude is 170 
m/sec (0.5 × 340 = 170). If this aircraft is flying with the same Mach number at 11,000 ft 
altitude, the true air speed will be 147 m/sec (0.5 × 249 = 147). In addition, the air density 
decreases with altitude  with a higher rate . Thus, the higher altitude means the lower 
Reynolds number (Equation 3.22) , and therefore the higher C Do. Figure 3. 33 illustrates 
the variati ons of drag force for a light transport aircraft with turbofan engines at various 
altitudes.  This transport aircraft has a stall speed of 90 knot s and a maximum speed of 
590 knot s. 
 
 
Figure 3. 33. Variations of drag force witho ut considering the compressibility effects  
 
0 100 200 300 400 500 6000.20.40.60.811.21.41.61.82x 105
V (knot)D (N)
  
h=0
h=2000 m
h=4000 m
h=6000 m
h=8000 m
h=10000 m
h=12000 mAircraft Performance Analysis   49 
 In conclusion, it can be assumed that at the Mach numbers less than 0.7, the 
variation of C Do is not significant such that it can be considered constant. At higher Mach 
numbers, the compressibility effect and wav e drag must be taken into account. The 
second conclusion is that, at higher altitude, total drag force is reduced. The reason is 
that, although at higher altitude, the C Do is increased, but the air density decrease s. The 
rate of change (decrease) in air de nsity is faster than the rate of change (increase) of C Do. 
This is one of the reasons why airlines choose to fly at higher altitudes despite the need 
and cost of climb.  
 
 
Example 3.4  
Consider the aircraft in example 3.1 is equipped with  a single -slotted fl ap with an average 
flap chord of 2.3 m. Th e aircraft takes off with a flap angle of 20 degrees and lands with a 
flap angle of 35 degrees. Assume the C Do of landing gear is 0.01, induced drag correction 
factor ; K is 0.052 ; and both take -off and landing spee ds are 130 knot. Determine the 
aircraft C Do at take -off and landing  configurations . 
 
Solution:  
 
The C Do of the flap is given by  
B
ff
D ACCC
flapo



                        (3.26)  
From Table 3. 3, A = 0.00018 and B = 2, so  
 
The C Do of flap at take -off is  
 0178.0 20 00018.03.93.2 2


flapoDC
                     (3.26)  
 
The C Do of the flap at landing is  
 
 0545.0 35 00018.03.93.2 2


flapoDC
                     (3.26)  
The take -off C Do:    
 
051.0 01.0 0178.0 023.0 
 LGo TO oflap cleano TOo D D D D C C C C
      (3.47)  
 
To find aircraft drag coefficient , we need to determine the ind uced drag coefficient. The 
lift coefficient at take -off is:  
 
  16.2
5144.0 130 567 225.181.9 38000029.0 29.02 2
 
LOLVSmgC
TO
       (3.49)  
 
242.0 16.2 052.02 2L DKC C
i
                       (3.12)  Aircraft Performance Analysis   50 
  
So, C DTO is 
 
 293.0 243.0 051.02 
TO TOo TO L D D CK C C
        (3.48)  
 
For the landing:  
  4.2
5144.0 130 567 225.181.9 3800002 2
2 2
 
LOLVSmgC
L
           (3.52) 
3.0 4.2 052.02 2L D CK C
i
                          (3.12)  
 
088.001.0 0545.0 023.0 
 LGo L oflap cleano Lo D D D D C C C C
      (3.47)  
 
 
 387.03.0 088.02 
L Lo L L D D CK C C
        (3.48)  
 
  Aircraft Performance Analysis   51 
 Problems  
Note:  In all problems, assume ISA condition, unless otherwise stated.  
  
1. A GA aircraft is flying at 5,000 ft alt itude. The length of the fuselage is 7 m, wing 
mean aerodynamic chord is 1.5 m, horizontal tail mean aerodynamic chord is 1.5 
m, and vertical tail mean aerodynamic chord is 0.6 m. Determine Reynolds 
number of fuselage, wing, horizontal tail and vertical ta il. 
 
2. The following (figure 3.3 4) is a top -view of Boeing 757 transport aircraft that has 
a wing span of 38.05 m. Using a proper scale and using a series of measurements, 
determine the wing reference (gross) area, and wing net area of this aircraft.  
 
 
 
Figure 3. 34. Top -view of Boeing 757 transport aircraft  
 
3. Estimate the wing wetted area of Boeing 757 (problem 2). Assume the wing has a 
maximum thickness of 12%.  
 
4. The mean aerodynamic chord of a trainer aircraft is 3.1 m. This trai ner is cruising 
at sea level with a speed of Mach 0.3. Determine skin friction coefficient of the 
wing when boundary layer over the wing is: a. laminar, b. turbulent.  
 
5. A business jet aircraft with a 31 m2 wing area and a mass of 6,500 kg is flying at 
10,00 0 ft altitude with a speed of 274 knot. If C Do = 0.026, K = 0.052, C Lmax = 
1.8, calculate and plot the following  items : 
Aircraft Performance Analysis   52 
 a. drag polar  
b. variation of drag force with speed.  
 
6. The tip chord of a wing is 6 m and its root chord is 9 m. What is the mean 
aerodynamic chord?  
 
7. The Attack aircraft Thunderbolt II (Fairchild A -10) has the following features:  
mTO = 22,221 kg, S = 47 m2, K = 0.06, C Do = 0.032, V max = 377 knot, V TO = 120 
knot. Assume that the C Do is constant throughout all speeds.  
 
a. Plot the Variation of zero-lift drag ( Do) versus speed (from take -off speed 
to maximum speed)  
b. Plot the Variation of induced drag ( Di) versus speed (from take -off speed 
to maximum speed)  
c. Plot the Variation of total drag ( D) versus speed (from take -off speed to 
maximum speed)  
d. At what speed, the drag force is minimum?  
 
8. The wing of the twin-turbofan airliner Boeing 777 has a 31.6 degrees of leading 
edge sweepback, a span of 60.93 m and a planform area of 427.8 m2. Determine 
Oswald efficiency factor (e) and induced drag correction factor  (K) for this wing.  
 
9. Determine the Oswald efficiency factor of a rectangular wing with an aspect ratio 
of 14.   
 
10. A single engine trainer aircraft with a wing area of 26 m2 has a fixed landing gear 
with three similar tires. Each tire has a diameter of 25 cm  and a thickness of 7 cm. 
Each tire is connected to the fuselage with a strut with a diameter of 4 cm and a 
length of 15 cm. The landing gear does not have fairing , determine zero -lift drag 
coefficient of  the landing gear.  
 
11. A cargo airplane is cruising wit h a speed of Mach 0.47, is taking off with a speed 
of 95 knot and is landing with a speed of 88 knot. The plain flap with a 20% 
chord ratio is deflected down 22 degrees during take -off and 35 degrees during 
landing. The aircraft has a mass of 13,150 kg, a wing area of 41.2 m2, and induced 
drag correction factor, K is 0.048. The zero lift drag coefficients of all 
components are  
CDow = 0.008, C Dof = 0.006, C Doht = 0.0016, C Dovt = 0.0012, C Don = 0.002, 
CDoLG = 0.015, C Dos = 0.004,  
Determine drag force at  
a. cruise 
b. take-off 
c. landing  
 
12. A Swedish aircraft designer is designing a fuselage for a 36 -passenger aircraft to 
cruise at a Mach number of 0.55. He is thinking of two seating arrangement Aircraft Performance Analysis   53 
 options: a. 12 rows of three passengers, and b. 18 rows of two passengers. If  he 
selects option a, the fuselage length would be 19.7 m with a diameter of 2.3 m. In 
option b the fuselage length would be 27.2 m with a diameter of 1.55 m. What 
option yields the lowest fuselage zero -lift drag coefficient?  
 
13. The amphibian airplane Lake L A-250 (figure 3.3 5) has a wing with the following 
features:  
S = 15.24 m2, b = 11.68 m, MAC =1.35 m, (t/c) max = 15%, airfoil: NACA 4415, 
Cdminw = 0.0042  
The aircraft has a mass of 1,678 kg and is cruising with a speed of 155 knot. 
Determine the wing zero -lift drag coefficient. For other information, use the 
aircraft three -view that is provided.  
 
 
Figure 3. 35. Three -view of amphibian airplane Lake LA -250 
 
14. Assume that the aircraft in problem 13 has a plain flap with a chord ratio o f 0.2. 
Determine the flap CDo, when it is deflected 30 degrees during a take-off 
operation.  
 
15. A twelve -seat commuter airplane has a vertical tail with the following features:   
Svt = 4.3 m2, bvt = 5.4 m, (t/c) max_vt  = 10%, C dmin_vt  = 0.005. The aircraft has  a 
wing area of 29.4 m2 and is cruising with a true airspeed of 160 knot at an altitude 
of 18,000 ft ISA condition. Determine the vertical tail zero -lift drag coefficient.  
 
16. The four -seat light airplane Piper PA -34 has a horizontal tail with the following 
features:  
Sht = 3.6 m2, bht = 4.14 m, (t/c) max_ht  = 12%, C dmin -ht = 0.0047  
 The aircraft has a mass of 2,154 kg, a wing area of 19.39 m2 and is cruising at 
171 knot at an altitude of 18,500 ft. Determine the horizontal tail zero -lift drag 
coefficient.  
 
17. A jet trainer with a retractable landing gear has the following features:  
 
Aircraft Performance Analysis   54 
 mTO = 5,630 kg, S = 25.1 m2, b = 17.4 m, e  = 0.85, V c = 270 knot, C Lmax = 2.2, V TO = 
1.2 V s, V Land = 1.3 V s, CDoclean  = 0.032, C DoflapTO  = 0.02, C DoflapLand  = 0.035, C DoLG = 
0.01.  
 
Determine the aircraft drag at three flight conditions: a. clean  (cruise speed) , take -off, 
and c. landing.  
 
18. The wings of the Y -5B agricultural biplane are connected together thru two struts. 
Each strut has a circular cross section with the length of 1.2 m an d a diameter of 4 
cm. The total planform area of both wings is 38 m2; determine the zero -lift drag 
coefficient of struts.  
 
19. A single -engine small aircraft has a wing area of 26 m2 and a turboprop engine 
that has a power of 600 hp. The aircraft is cruising at 25,000 ft altitude with a 
speed of 182 knot. Determine  the engine  cooling drag coefficient . Assume K e = 2.   
 
20. A business jet aircraft with a wing area of 45 m2 is equipped with two turbofan 
engines. Each engine is podded in a nacelle with a diameter of 62 cm and a length 
of 110 cm. Determine nacelle zero -lift drag coefficient, provided the aircraft is 
cruising with a speed of 320 knot at an altitude of 28,000 ft.  
 
21. A maneuverable aircraft has two fuel tanks at the wingtips. Each fuel tank has a 
shape of an ellipsoid with a diameter of 20 cm and a length of 130 cm. Determine 
fuel tank zero -lift drag coefficient, provided the aircraft is cruising with a speed of 
190 knot at an altitude of 18,000 ft.  
 
22. The F -16 supersonic jet fighter (figure 3.3 6) with a mass 12,331 kg and a wing 
area of 27.8 m2 is cruising at an altitude of 40,000 ft at Mach number 2.1. The 
wing span is 9.45 m and length of the fuselage is 15.3 m. Determine wave drag of 
the aircraft , assuming the aircraft volume is 21.3 m2. 
 
23. Assu me that F -16 (problem 22) is flying at a Mach number of 1.2 at the same 
altitude. What is wave drag of this fighter at this flight condition? Compare the 
result with the result of problem 22 and comment about your finding.  
 
  Aircraft Performance Analysis   55 
  
 Figure 3. 36. The three -view of Fighter jet F -16A 
 
24. The fuselage of a large transport  aircraft has a diameter of 3.8 m and a length of 
43 m. Determine the fuselage zero -lift drag, assuming the wing area to be 180 m2 
and cruising speed to be 350 knot  at 35,0 00 ft. 
 
25. Determine the terminal velocity of a water droplet; assuming it has a shape of a 
sphere with a radius of 2 mm. The density of water is 998 kg/m3. 
 
26. You are required to design a parachute  for the safe landing of a paratrooper with a 
mass of 85 kg. De termine the diameter of the parachute , if the terminal velocity is 
required to be 1 m/s at 5000 ft altitude. Ignore the drag of the paratrooper and 
strings. The mass of the parachute is 6 kg.  
 
27. Felix Baumgartner, an Austrian daredevil fell to Earth from mor e than 24 miles 
high, becoming the first human to break the sound barrier under his own power, 
on October 14, 2012. He made the highest and fastest jump in history after 
ascending by a helium balloon to an altitude of 128,100 feet, reaching a maximum 
speed  of Mach 1.24. Assume the terminal velocity was at 70,000 ft, and his 
frontal area while descending is 0.12 m2; determine drag coefficient of his body.  
 
28. Consider a very thin flat plate wing with a chord of 0.4 m and a span of 3.6 m. 
The wing is placed at a  6o angle of attack in a Mach 1.3 air flow. Determine the 
wave drag coefficient.  
 
29. Consider a 2% thickness  flat plate wing with a chord of 1.2 m and a span of 4.5 
m. The wing is placed at a 3o angle of attack in a Mach 1.7 air flow. Determine  
Aircraft Performance Analysis   56 
  
a. wing zero -lift drag coefficient  
b. induced drag coefficient  
c. wing wave drag coefficient.  
 
Assuming the aircraft has a ma ss of 1000 kg and is cruising at an alti tude of 
12,000 ft. The wing Cd min may be assumed to be 0.003 , and Oswald efficiency 
factor to be 0.8 .  
 
30. Consider a rectangular wing with a span of 15 m and a chord of 3 m in a Mach 2.6  
air flow (the side -view as sketched in figure 3.2 8). The airfoil section is a 7° half -
angle wedge at zero angle of attack. Calculate the wave drag coefficient. Assume 
that the expansio n over the corners of the base is such that, the base pressure is 
equal to the free -stream pressure.  
 
31. Consider a tapered wing with a span of 12 m and a chord of 2.5 m in a Mach 1.5  
air flow (the side -view as sketched in figure 3.2 8). The airfoil section is  a 4° half -
angle wedge at zero angle of attack. Calculate the wave drag coefficient. Assume 
that the expansion over the corners of the base is such that, the base pressure is 
equal to the free -stream pressure. The wing taper ratio is 0.4.  
 
 
 
 
 Aircraft Performance Analysis   57 
 References  
1. Hoak D. E., USAF Stability and Control Datcom, Air Force Flight Dynamics 
Laboratory, Wright -Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio, 1978  
2. McCormick B. W., Aerodynamics; Aeronautics; and Flight Dynamics, John Wiley, 
1995  
3. Abbott I. H., and von Doenhoff A. E., Theory of Wing Sections , Dover, 1959  
4. Horner S. R., Fluid -Dynamic Drag, Midland Park, NJ, 1965  
5. Ross  R., Neal R.D., Learjet Model 25 Drag Analysis, Proceeding of the NASA -
Industry -University GA drag reduction workshop, Lawrence, KS, July 14 -16, 1975  
6. Shevell R., Fundamentals of Flight, Second Edition, Prentice Hall, 1989  
7. Anderson J., Modern Compressible F low, Third edition, McGraw -Hill, 2005  
8. Kuchemann D., Aerodynamic Design of Aircraft,  Pergamon Press, 1978  
9. Raymer D. P, Aircraft Design: A Conceptual Approach, AIAA, 2006  
10. Anderson J., Fundamentals of Aerodynamics, third edition, McGraw -Hill, 2005  
11. Roskam J., Airplane Design, Volume VI, DAR Corp., 2004  
12. Paul Jackson, et al., Jane’s all the World’s Aircraft, Jane’s Information Group, several 
years  
13. Cengel Y. A., and Cimbala J. M.,  Fluid Mechanics: Fundamentals and Applications , 
3rd edition, McGraw -Hill, 2013.  
14. Stinton D., The Anatomy of the Airplane, Second Edition, AIAA, 1998  
15. Lan E. C. and Roskam J., Airplane Aerodynamics and Performance, DAR Corp., 
2003  
16. www.airliners.net  
 
 
 
 